

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
Understanding polysemanticity in neural networks
through coding theory
Simon C. Marshall∗
LIACS, Leiden University
Jan H. Kirchner
OpenAI†
Abstract
Despite substantial efforts, neural network interpretability remains an elusive goal,
with previous research failing to provide succinct explanations of most single
neurons’ impact on the network output. This limitation is due to the polysemantic
nature of most neurons, whereby a given neuron is involved in multiple unrelated
network states, complicating the interpretation of that neuron. In this paper, we
apply tools developed in neuroscience and information theory to propose both a
novel practical approach to network interpretability and theoretical insights into
polysemanticity and the density of codes. We infer levels of redundancy in the
network’s code by inspecting the eigenspectrum of the activation’s covariance
matrix. Furthermore, we show how random projections can reveal whether a
network exhibits a smooth or non-differentiable code and hence how interpretable
the code is. This same framework explains the advantages of polysemantic neurons
to learning performance and explains trends found in recent results by Elhage et
al. (2022). Our approach advances the pursuit of interpretability in neural networks,
providing insights into their underlying structure and suggesting new avenues for
circuit-level interpretability.
1
Introduction
As the capabilities of deep neural networks increase, the need for interpretability to understand
failure modes, fix bugs, and establish accountability becomes increasingly apparent.10,28,35 Given an
explanation of the internal structure of a deep neural network, we might be able to infer the logic
that leads to a given output and correct this logic to conform with our preferences for the model’s
behaviour. The methods for achieving interpretability overlap with those of other areas of deep
learning research. For example, more interpretable networks tend to be more robust to adversarial
attacks,36,14 while more robust networks tend to be more interpretable.13,2 Modularity and continual
learning are also related to interpretability, as methods that promote specialization among weights or
neurons can make the network easier to understand.22,26,37
Despite the rapid development of interpretability techniques, key challenges remain. Techniques
need to be sufficiently robust to scale to large models,33,35 withstand rigorous evaluation,21,19 and
work reliably across domains.9 One particular challenge for interpretability is the phenomenon of
polysemanticity, whereby neurons are activated by multiple unrelated features.15,31 Polysemanticity
poses a challenge for interpretability based on individual neurons,6 which will necessarily be incorrect
or incomplete. One explanation for why polysemanticity is near ubiquitous is the superposition
hypothesis which posits that neural networks overload individual neurons with multiple roles in order
to leverage the maximum available network capacity.32,12 A deep understanding of these phenomena
will be important for advancing interpretability research.
∗s.c.marshall@liacs.leidenuniv.nl
†Work done outside of OpenAI.
arXiv:2401.17975v1  [cs.LG]  31 Jan 2024


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
a
b
input
... ... ... ... ...
polysemantic
... ... ... ... ...
superposition
monosemantic
c
#dimensions
per feature
0
1
empirical
(Elhage et al.)
optimal (ours)
10
sparsity (1/(1-S))
1
Figure 1: Network capacity of deep artificial neural networks. a. Schematic of deep artificial
neural network (ANN) receiving a set of input signals (left; orange) and processing the signal
through consecutive layers of neurons (right; shades of gray) connected in an all-to-all fashion.
b. Schematic of different possible coding schemes within a layer of the ANN. Monosemantic
coding (left): one-to-one identification between inputs and neuron activations (highlighted in orange)
without overlap. Polysemantic coding (middle): One-to-one identification between inputs and neuron
activations with overlap. Superposition coding (right): One-to-many identification between inputs
and neuron activations. Note that the third scenario is a sub-type of the second scenario. c. Number
of dimensions needed in a neural network’s hidden layer per input feature as a function of varying
feature sparsity(gray) compared to our theoretical prediction of optimal encoding (green). Data
extracted from ref. [12]. Dashed horizontal lines indicate "sticky" regions12 where the network code
deviates from optimal.
In parallel with developments in interpretability research, information theory has emerged as a
promising approach for analyzing neural networks. A landmark study in this field proposed to
analyze deep neural networks by studying the plane formed by the amount of mutual information
between hidden activations and the network’s input and output variables.41 Applying this perspective
to network activations during training provides deep insight into the trade-offs and learning dynamics
that shape emerging representations.38 Intriguingly, this work suggests that many aspects of deep
neural networks can be explained solely by optimality considerations and without reference to the
details of training,41,20 suggesting a possible top-down approach to studying network interpretability.
Building on these previous works, in this paper, we propose a novel approach to interpretability by
analyzing the eigenspectrum of neural networks from a coding perspective. We leverage the decay
rate of the eigenspectrum of the activation covariance matrix to infer the amount of redundancy in the
neural network’s code. This approach offers insights into the code’s high-level properties, including
its channel capacity and information flow. We demonstrate how random projections can be employed
to determine whether a network exhibits a smooth or non-differentiable phase transition, further
enhancing our understanding of the network’s structure and behaviour. Our approach has the potential
to inform the design of more interpretable and robust neural networks, ultimately leading to more
transparent and reliable deep learning models.
2
Results
Polysemanticity and superposition as the default for efficient encoding of information. When
presented with an appropriately formatted input, the hidden layers of a deep neural network activate
based on the characteristics of the input and based on the connectivity of neurons within that
network (Fig. 1a). Individual neurons in the network will activate very selectively to a few inputs
(monosemantic coding) or will activate broadly to multiple inputs (polysemantic/superposition
coding) depending on the learned code (Fig. 1b). While these phenomena traditionally are studied
at the single-neuron level,11 we regard them as properties of the network code. Viewed from this
perspective, it is immediately apparent that a network that needs to encode a number of features larger
than the number of neurons per layer will benefit from utilizing a superposition code (Fig. 1b).
To investigate whether neural networks can indeed learn to leverage an approximately optimal
encoding of its input, we reanalyze a result from a recent study on toy models of superposition.12
In this setting, a deep neural network learns to encode and decode inputs, x, with varying sparsity,
S. By computing the information capacity of a neural network and comparing it to the information
2


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
network
 capacity (%)
# layers
1
10
d=5%
d=10%
d=15%
100
0
network
 capacity (%)
# layers
1
10
100
0
mono-
semantic
code
dropout
poly-
semantic
code
super-
position
code
a
b
c
Figure 2: Redundancy in channel code enables noise robustness. a. Illustration of the effect of
dropout on the three types of code introduced in Figure 1. While dropout corrupts information in the
monosemantic (top, circle) and superposition (bottom, star) codes, a polysemantic code can recover
from dropout. b., c. Network capacity as a function of network for different levels of dropout α for
monosemantic (b, circle), superposition (b, star) and polysemantic code (c, square).
content of a sparse input, we can calculate the compression rate, R, that could be achieved by an
optimal code,
R = 1 −S + 1
H (−S log(S) −(1 −S) log(1 −S)),
(1)
where H = ⟨log px⟩is the information content (entropy) of a single random input, x (see Supplemen-
tary Note for detailed derivation). For sufficiently large H, e.g. 16 or 32 bits, R can be approximated
as R = 1 −S. Intriguingly, this analytic result provides a good fit to the simulation data (Fig.1c),
with the deviations from the optimal being due to “sticky" encoding regimes where the toy model
learns a highly robust but suboptimal encoding.12
Might an optimal code be a more interpretable code? The hardness of average case decoding of neural
network codes is unknown, but results for specific tasks indicate the problem might be difficult.17
Indeed, for some tasks, we demonstrate that the optimal code resists polynomial time decoders almost
always (see Supplementary Note). Given that optimal polysemantic codes reuse the same neuron for
many concepts and deciding properties of highly convoluted functions is generally hard, we might
expect networks that learn a nearly optimal code to be very difficult to interpret.
Robust encoding implies reduced channel capacity. While the code learned by networks might be
very difficult to interpret in general due to its high information content, in practice, neural networks
do not solely maximize information density. In the face of noise and other perturbations, neural
networks must be robust by introducing redundancies and other error-correcting steps into the code.
To illustrate the effect of noise, we consider dropout,39 a common form of regularisation in neural
networks (Fig. 2a). Dropout is itself a noise source: as information passes through layers, a fraction,
D ∈[0, 1], of the total number of neurons is erased. A naïve dense code (such as that from the
previous subsection) with no redundancies would immediately lose a fraction D of information
encoded across neurons in the first dropout layer and then a fraction D again in the subsequent
dropout layers, giving an effective information capacity of ˜Cdropout ∼C(1 −D)N, after N dropout
layers, where C is the capacity of the noiseless channel (Fig. 2b).
However, by utilizing a redundant encoding, it is possible to introduce an error-correcting component
into the code, which is resistant to some noise sources. When error-correction is present, the neural
network can reliably transmit the entire channel capacity of a layer with dropout through every layer
of the network (Fig. 2c, see Supplementary Note for detailed derivation),
Cdropout ∼C(1 −D).
(2)
We verified that a neural network trained as an autoencoder could indeed learn error-correction by
measuring the mutual information between the input and the hidden layers3 and observing that after
3


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
natural
images
hidden
activations
a
principal component #
eigenvalue squared (norm.)
b
depth 1
depth 8
...
depth 2
depth 7
regression
eigenvector #1
eigenvector #3
eigenvector #100
c
= -1.15
= -1.02
= -1.01
= -0.89
= -0.84
= -0.73
= -1.17
= -1.5
max
min
principal
component #
eigenvalue squared (norm.)
non-
redundant
code
= 0
redundant
code
= -∞
8
depth
1
exponent
-0.8
-1.6
d
Figure 3: The code shapes hidden activation eigenspectrum. a. Left: Schematic illustrating
input to (natural images from the CIFAR dataset) and hidden activations of an Autoencoder-ResNet
(see Methods for details). Right: Idealized eigenspectrum for hidden activations implementing a
maximally redundant (top) or maximally non-redundant (bottom) code. b. Log-log plot of eigenvalues
as a function of principal components for hidden activations from different network depths (shades
of grey and legend in bottom right). Dashed line indicates the power law fit obtained from Huber
regression (see Methods). Large deviations from the power law distribution exist for later layers,
hence power law fits represent approximations. Note that the later eigenspectra resemble the predicted
spectrum of a linear code (compare a), where the code words are simple linear combinations. c.
Estimated power law exponent α as a function of network depth. Dashed line marks α = −1. d.
Sample of different eigenvectors (rows) displayed as filters of the ResNet.
training, the network does not experience exponential decay of information (see Supplementary Note
for details).
Thus, when a neural network is exposed to moderate noise, we expect the code to become more
redundant, distributing the representation of inputs across multiple activation patterns. While this
distribution of representations across neurons discourages a monosemantic code (Fig. 2a), it is unclear
whether it might facilitate the holistic interpretation of activations across a given layer.
Codes produce eigenspectra with varying speeds of decay. We next turned to probe the high-level
properties of a neural network’s code. A natural approach that was recently proposed in the study
of coding properties of biological systems40,23 is to investigate the eigenspectrum of the activation
covariance matrix. The shape of the eigenspectrum can reflect the properties of the network’s code.
In particular, a largely redundant code has an eigenspectrum with a steep decay since only a small
subset of possible configurations is actually relevant to the network’s code (Fig. 3a). In contrast,
a maximally non-redundant code will exhibit a more gradual decay in the eigenspectrum since it
exploits the entire space of possible configurations (Fig. 3a). In practice, eigenspectra tend not to
match either extreme and instead decay according to a power law with parameter α. Applying this
approach to deep neural networks, we find the same power law decay but with varying values of α.
By using this encoding, the effective channel capacity becomes approximately.
Cα ≈C −|α|m log(m/e),
(3)
where m is the width of the given layer and C is the channel capacity using the optimal dense
encoding (see Supplementary Note for detailed derivation).
When visualizing the eigenspectrum of the hidden activations of a trained Autoencoder-ResNet trained
on the ImageNet dataset without dropout (Fig. 3a), we find that the decay of the eigenspectrum
changes non-monotonically over the depth of the network (Fig. 3b). The eigenspectrum initially
decays with a power law exponent just below −1, which is consistent with the observation that the
spectrum of natural images decays with that same exponent.40 The eigenspectrum decay then slows
down, with the power law exponent increasing above −1 for the intermediate layers of the network,
4


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
time
a
moving
dot
time (a.u.)
b
action
10
104
depth 1
depth 8
...
depth 2
depth 7
c
x
y
= 6.1k
= 6.1k
= 8k
= 8.1k
= 2.2k
= 2.8k
= 0.1k
= 0.1k
power law
exponent
-0.8
-1.6
action
1
104
8
depth
1
d
Figure 4: Random projections of hidden activations exhibit varying amount of smoothness. a.
Simple moving dot stimulus generated from the sin and cos function (top), converted into a stack
of frames (middle), and passed into the network to yield hidden activations (bottom). b. Sample
of random projections of hidden activations produced from the moving dot stimulus. Color of box
indicates layer of the network, and color of the random projection indicates time. Inset text shows
average activation. c. Average action of random projections as a function of network depth. Average
computed over 1000 random projections (see Methods). d. Average action of random projections as
a function of the estimated power law exponent α.
before eventually decaying rapidly with a power law exponent ≤−1 for the final layers (Fig. 3c).
Consistent with results from neuroscience,40 the corresponding eigenfilters vary from coarse global
filters for the first eigenvectors to intricate filters sensitive to local variations for later eigenvectors.
We note that the recovered eigenvectors resemble previously described Gabor receptive fields24 as
well as curve detectors8 (Fig. 3d).
In summary, the eigenspectrum of a trained Autoencoder-ResNet reveals that the trained network
learns a code that is neither highly redundant nor one that maximizes capacity. Instead, we find that
the neural code exhibits some redundancy, particularly towards early and late layers, while employing
less redundant codes in intermediate layers.
Random projections reflect smoothness of code. What can we say about the neural network code
beyond general statements regarding its redundancy? We hypothesized that an input that is encoded
with more redundancy might be easier to decode with linear probes.1 To this end, we projected
the m hidden activations produced by a moving dot stimulus with n frames (Fig. 4a), A ∈Rn×m,
onto a randomly chosen basis of vectors with normalized variance, r ∈Rm×3, ri ∼N(0, 1
mI).
These random projections, z = Ar, have the useful property that their average action, ⟨E[z]⟩=
1
2
R
|| ˙z(t)||2dt, is proportional to the decay factor α,
⟨E[z]⟩=
m
X
k=1
λk ∼1
2ζ(−α),
(4)
where λi are the eigenvalues of the hidden activations and ζ is the Riemann zeta function restricted
to the real numbers, ζ(s) = P∞
k=1
1
ks .
When displaying the random projections as curves, we indeed observed that while early layers
produce highly discontinuous projections, later layers of the network recover some of the smooth
structure of the input (Fig. 4b). In particular, we noticed that the transition between discontinuous
and locally smooth occurs as the decay factor α falls below −1 (Fig. 4c). From eq. 4, we see that in
this regime, the expected action of the curve is finite, while in the regime α > −1, the action of the
curve grows without bound.
The slow decay of eigenspectra in artificial neural networks stands in stark contrast to the eigenspectra
in the visual cortex of the mouse40 and the macaque.23 In this biological network, the power law
exponent α is consistently below −1, constraining the network to use a continuous and differential
code of the input. Instead, the artificial neural network resembles the much smaller zebrafish43 with a
slowly decaying eigenspectrum with α ≈−0.7.
5


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
principal component #
eigenvalue squared
(norm.)
depth 2
depth 4
depth 6
depth 8
dropout 10%
dropout 80%
Figure 5: Higher noise induces more robust codes. Log-log plot of eigenvalues as a function of
principal components for hidden activations for two different networks with different dropout rates.
The increase in non-linearity indicates a learnt code which is more robust to noise (which dropout
introduces).
Taken together, we found that the speed of decay of the eigenspectrum determines the statistical
properties of random projections of stimuli. A fast decay (α ≤−1) is common in larger mammals40,23
and results in continuous and differentiable projections. A slow decay (α > −1) is more prominent in
small artificial neural networks and in the zebrafish43 and implies discontinuous random projections.
Deviations from power law distribution In the final layers of figure 3 we can see that the eigen-
spectrum in some cases systematically deviates from the power law. These deviations stem from
transitions from the ‘biological power-law’ case to the optimal ‘redundant code’ case (the step func-
tion in Fig. 3a), which helps protect the information from loss. To test this hypothesis we investigate
the effect of higher and lower levels of dropout noise on the power spectrum (Fig. 5).
In early layers, both the high and low dropout cases are well described by a simple power-law. In
contrast, intermediate and late layers exhibit increasingly pronounced step-like spectra, especially in
the higher-dropout layer. These properties indicate a large linear redundancy in the code, which is a
characteristic signature of error-correcting codes.
Identifying the exact error-correcting code is beyond the scope of this paper, but we note that the
non-linear decay is not a sharp step function, as would be the case with a linear error-correcting code.
While this decay is consistent with a suboptimal encoding, we hypothesise that instead, the learnt
code is not entirely linear. Consistently, the dropoff becomes more pronounced in later layers of the
network, likely because linear error correction early in the network is both challenging (there are
fewer layers to arrange the information into a code) and less necessary (as the image already contains
many redundancies, minimising damage done by losing a couple of pixels).
Dropout incentivizes fast decay of eigenspectrum. As a network’s code depends on the amount of
noise present (Fig. 2), it is natural to ask how the learned code changes as the dropout rate increases.
We systematically varied the amount of dropout the network experiences (Fig. 6a) and observed that
higher dropout generally produce lower power law exponents (Fig. 6b). Interestingly, already for a
dropout rate of 20%, the power law exponent remains very close to −1, as in the visual cortex of the
mouse40 and the macaque.23 Consistent with our observation in networks without dropout (Fig. 4),
networks with lower power law exponent also tend to produce random projections with lower average
action (Fig. 6c).
To test whether networks with higher dropout might encode more robust representations of their
input throughout their layers, we computed the variance of the input explained by random projections
from different layers of the network (see Methods). We found that the explained variance increases
with both dropout rate and network depth (Fig. 6d). Consistently, we found that trajectories with low
average action tend to explain a higher fraction of input variance (Fig. 6e).
These findings suggest that introducing dropout during training can reliably produce networks with a
faster-decaying eigenspectrum. Random projections from these networks exhibit low average action
and tend to resemble robustly and linearly encode some global features of the input.
Efficient codes provide a framework for understanding language model interpretability. The
success of deep learning models in natural language processing, particularly the transformer archi-
tecture,42 provides a range of new challenges and opportunities for interpretability research.11,12,6
A prominent challenge is the unprecedented size of large language models,7 which makes the use
of interpretability methods that rely on human annotation of individual components infeasible. A
6


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
... ... ... ... ...
dropout  0%
... ... ... ... ...
dropout  40%
... ... ... ... ...
dropout  80%
a
8
depth
1
b
power law
exponent
-0.8
-1.6
action
1
104
8
depth
1
d
0
25%
explained
variance
of input
c
action
1
104
explained
variance
of input
15
35
e
8
depth
1
dropout
0
80
Figure 6: Dropout during training leads to rapidly decaying eigenspectra and smooth random
projections. a. Schematic illustrating dropout across all layers with different strengths (0% top,
40% middle, 80% bottom). b. Estimated power law exponent α as a function of network depth for
different levels of dropout (shades of green). c. Average action of random projections as a function
of network depth for different levels of dropout. d. Average percentage of input variance explained
by random projections as a function of network depth for different layers of dropout. Inset shows
three examples of random projections. e. Average percentage of input variance explained by random
projections as a function of the average action of the random projection.
recent study proposes a GPT-assisted method for generating single neuron explanations in a scalable
fashion.6 While the proposed method manages to provide explanations with predictive power for
thousands of neurons, the approach is limited to cases without polysemanticity and superposition,
which our work suggests is a small fraction. To investigate whether our approach of interpreting
random projections might be applicable to this setting, we turned to analyze the eigenspectrum of a
large language model.34
We calculated the power law exponent α as a function of network depth. We observed that the power
law exponent consistently remains above the critical value (α ≥−1, Fig. 7a), indicating unbounded
variance of random projections. This observation is consistent with the highly nonlinear nature of
natural language.27
To investigate whether a lower power law exponent might nonetheless translate into more expressive
random projections, we compute the explanation score (see Methods) for the activation of single
neurons and random projections across different layers of the network (Fig. 7b,c). Interestingly,
we found that the average explanation score changes non-monotonically, starting at comparatively
high values in the first layers, decreasing up until two-thirds of the network depth, and eventually
increasing again. The explanation score for random projections is the inverse of the score for single
neurons, with our method performing well in the layers in which the single-neuron method performs
a
depth
5
40
-0.45
-0.6
power law
exponent
b
0
0.1
depth
5
40
explanation
score
single neuron
(Bills et al.)
random projection
(ours)
0
100
-30
30
token #
projected
activity
donations
donations
donations
donations
volunteers
participate
participate
c
Figure 7: Codes in large language models. a. Estimated power law exponent α as a function
of network depth of a large language model.34 Error bars indicate 95% confidence interval. b.
Explanation score6 as a function of network depth for explanations for the activation of single neurons
(gray) or random projections (green). Data extracted from ref. [6]. Error bars indicate 95% confidence
interval. c. Illustrative example of a low-action random projection from layer 3.
7


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
poorly. We hypothesize that the random projection and single neuron approach may complement
each other. By using both in tandem, we might obtain a more complete picture of coding in neural
networks, bringing us close to the goal of understanding the outputs of large models.
3
Discussion
In this study, we explored the properties of neural network codes and their implications for inter-
pretability, leveraging concepts from information theory and neuroscience. Our analysis revealed
that the eigenspectrum of the activation covariance matrix provides insights into the redundancy of a
network’s code and its capacity for error-correction. Our results demonstrated that networks with
higher dropout levels tend to employ codes with faster-decaying eigenspectra, yield smoother random
projections, and better explanations of input variance. Furthermore, we found that our approach to
interpreting random projections might complement existing single-neuron interpretability methods,
particularly in the context of large language models. Overall, our findings provide a top-down per-
spective on neural network interpretability, advancing our understanding of the underlying structure
of these models and suggesting new avenues for future research.
A fascinating aspect studying eigenspectrum decay in artificial neural networks is the potential
connection to neuroscience.40,23,43 In the same way that sufficiently large animals exhibit a neural
code that optimally trades coding capacity and robustness to perturbations,40,23 we hypothesize that
sufficiently large artificial neural networks might learn to strike the same balance. Indeed, a recent
study indicates that networks with a fast eigenspectrum decay are more robust to adversarial examples
and investigates which aspects of training and network architecture result in a more optimal decay.16
A systematic study of how the eigenspectrum decay changes as a function of network size might
reveal important information on whether we can expect large language models7 to have smooth
random projection.
An important direction for future research is to investigate the role of nonlinearities in the network
code. Considering that neural networks were initially developed for nonlinear signal processing,25
it is moderately surprising that modern networks allow linear read-out from their hidden layers.1,4
Several factors incentivize linearity in hidden layers, such as the linear structure of the residual
stream18,11 and the training objective of supervised learning which incentivizes linear separability of
concepts.5 Conversely, linear codes can have comparable performance to nonlinear codes;29 hence
they are not disadvantaged under optimization pressure. However, the exact reasons for which linear
structure networks converge to30 is an important open question into which our current work might
provide insight.
Overall, our efficient channel coding framework provides a top-down perspective on interpretability
in neural networks and offers a promising direction for future research in understanding deep learning
models’ underlying structure and behavior.
4
Methods
Statistics. We perform a Principal Component Analysis on the activations of the ReLu units of a
given layer. To reduce the computational capacity required by very high-dimensional data, we apply a
subsampling method by selecting every s-th component, where s is computed such that the resulting
dimension is less than 8000. We employ a randomized SVD solver for PCA fitting and restrict the
number of components to a maximum of 1000.
After fitting the PCA model, we perform a Huber regression analysis of the explained variance of the
PCA components to estimate each layer’s power-law exponent (α). The Huber regression is used
due to its robustness to outliers. Specifically, we fit the Huber regression model on the logarithm of
the PCA components’ indices (from 10 to 50) and the logarithm of their corresponding explained
variances.
We use a recently published method for automated interpretability in language models,6 which aims
to explain the activation patterns of individual neurons in a large language model (GPT-2 XL) with a
larger language model (GPT-4). We use GPT-4 to generate explanations of random projections of the
activations of all neurons in a given layer of GPT-2. The value of these explanations is then assessed
8


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
by a third model (GPT-3.5), which predicts the activation of the explained neuron on a held-out test
set. The correlation between the expected and the real output is then the explanation score.
Model training. We studied the eigenspectrum of a ResNet-based Variational Autoencoder (ResNet-
VAE) activations for image generation tasks. The ResNet-VAE model is built upon the ResNet-18
architecture pretrained on ImageNet. We remove the final fully connected layer from the ResNet
architecture and replace it with two sets of linear layers to encode latent variables mu and logvar.
The model employs two fully connected hidden layers with 1024 units each, followed by the latent
embedding layer with 256 dimensions. A dropout rate of 0.2 is applied during training to promote
regularization.
The model is trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset, which consists of 50,000 train and 10,000 test instances
of 32x32 pixel images belonging to 10 different classes. The images are resized to 224x224 pixels
and normalized before being fed into the network. We use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate
of 1e-3 to optimize the network parameters. The training process consists of 20 epochs, with a
batch size of 50. The model performance is measured by a custom loss function that combines Mean
Squared Error (MSE) and Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KLD).
In addition to the ResNet-VAE model, we studied the GPT-2 XL model34 through the PyTorch Hub
library. We computed explanation scores with the code published by Bills et al. (ref.,6 but computed
simulation scores with text-davinci-003 rather than GPT-4, since token logprobs are not available
through the API at the time of this study.
Code availability. After publication code will be publically available as a GitHub repository; at this
time, all experiments are available in the supplementary material.
References
[1]
Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. “Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier
probes”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01644 (2016).
[2]
Maximilian Augustin, Alexander Meinke, and Matthias Hein. “Adversarial robustness on
in-and out-distribution improves explainability”. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXVI 16. Springer.
2020, pp. 228–245.
[3]
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi et al. “Mine: mutual information neural estimation”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.04062 (2018).
[4]
Nora Belrose et al. “Eliciting Latent Predictions from Transformers with the Tuned Lens”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08112 (2023).
[5]
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. “Representation learning: A review and
new perspectives”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 35.8
(2013), pp. 1798–1828.
[6]
Steven Bills et al. Language models can explain neurons in language models. https://
openaipublic.blob.core.windows.net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.html.
2023.
[7]
Tom Brown et al. “Language models are few-shot learners”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 33 (2020), pp. 1877–1901.
[8]
Nick Cammarata et al. “Thread: Circuits”. In: Distill (2020). https://distill.pub/2020/circuits.
DOI: 10.23915/distill.00024.
[9]
Frances Ding, Jean-Stanislas Denain, and Jacob Steinhardt. “Grounding representation simi-
larity through statistical testing”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34
(2021), pp. 1556–1568.
[10]
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. “Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine
learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 (2017).
[11]
N Elhage et al. “A mathematical framework for transformer circuits”. In: Transformer Circuits
Thread (2021).
[12]
Nelson Elhage et al. “Toy Models of Superposition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652
(2022).
[13]
Logan Engstrom et al. “Adversarial robustness as a prior for learned representations”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.00945 (2019).
9


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
[14]
Chris Finlay and Adam M Oberman. “Scaleable input gradient regularization for adversarial
robustness”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11468 (2019).
[15]
Ruth Fong and Andrea Vedaldi. “Net2vec: Quantifying and explaining how concepts are
encoded by filters in deep neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2018, pp. 8730–8738.
[16]
Arna Ghosh et al. “Investigating power laws in deep representation learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.05808 (2022).
[17]
Shafi Goldwasser et al. “Planting undetectable backdoors in machine learning models”. In:
2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). IEEE.
2022, pp. 931–942.
[18]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[19]
Lars Holmberg. “Towards Benchmarking Explainable Artificial Intelligence Methods”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12120 (2022).
[20]
Shao-Lun Huang et al. “An information theoretic interpretation to deep neural networks”. In:
2019 IEEE international symposium on information theory (ISIT). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1984–1988.
[21]
Evan Hubinger. Automating auditing: An ambitious concrete technical research proposal.
2021.
[22]
James Kirkpatrick et al. “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks”. In: Proceed-
ings of the national academy of sciences 114.13 (2017), pp. 3521–3526.
[23]
Nathan CL Kong et al. “Increasing neural network robustness improves match to macaque
V1 eigenspectrum, spatial frequency preference and predictivity”. In: PLOS Computational
Biology 18.1 (2022), e1009739.
[24]
Norbert Kruger et al. “Deep hierarchies in the primate visual cortex: What can we learn for
computer vision?” In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 35.8
(2012), pp. 1847–1871.
[25]
Alan Lapedes and Robert Farber. Nonlinear signal processing using neural networks: Predic-
tion and system modelling. Tech. rep. 1987.
[26]
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. “Learning without forgetting”. In: IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence 40.12 (2017), pp. 2935–2947.
[27]
Tal Linzen. “Issues in evaluating semantic spaces using word analogies”. In: Proceedings
of the 1st Workshop on Evaluating Vector-Space Representations for NLP. Berlin, Germany:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2016, pp. 13–18. DOI: 10.18653/v1/W16-
2503. URL: https://aclanthology.org/W16-2503.
[28]
Zachary C Lipton. “The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of
interpretability is both important and slippery.” In: Queue 16.3 (2018), pp. 31–57.
[29]
David JC MacKay and Radford M Neal. “Near Shannon limit performance of low density
parity check codes”. In: Electronics letters 33.6 (1997), pp. 457–458.
[30]
Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. “Insights on representational similarity in
neural networks with canonical correlation”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 31 (2018).
[31]
Jesse Mu and Jacob Andreas. “Compositional explanations of neurons”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), pp. 17153–17163.
[32]
Chris Olah et al. “Zoom in: An introduction to circuits”. In: Distill 5.3 (2020), e00024–001.
[33]
Mensah Kwabena Patrick et al. “Capsule networks–a survey”. In: Journal of King Saud
University-computer and information sciences 34.1 (2022), pp. 1295–1310.
[34]
Alec Radford et al. “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners”. In: OpenAI blog
1.8 (2019), p. 9.
[35]
Tilman Räukur et al. “Toward transparent ai: A survey on interpreting the inner structures of
deep neural networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13243 (2022).
[36]
Andrew Ross and Finale Doshi-Velez. “Improving the adversarial robustness and interpretabil-
ity of deep neural networks by regularizing their input gradients”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 32. 1. 2018.
[37]
Andrei A Rusu et al. “Progressive neural networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671
(2016).
10


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
[38]
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. “Opening the black box of deep neural networks via
information”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00810 (2017).
[39]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting”.
In: The journal of machine learning research 15.1 (2014), pp. 1929–1958.
[40]
Carsen Stringer et al. “High-dimensional geometry of population responses in visual cortex”.
In: Nature 571.7765 (2019), pp. 361–365.
[41]
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. “Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle”.
In: 2015 ieee information theory workshop (itw). IEEE. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[42]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in neural information process-
ing systems 30 (2017).
[43]
Zezhen Wang et al. “The scale-invariant covariance spectrum of brain-wide activity”. In:
bioRxiv (2023), pp. 2023–02.
11


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
Understanding Polysemanticity and Improved Interpretability
in Neural Networks with Coding Theory - Supplementary
Material
1
Experimental details
A zip file is provided in this supplementary material with the exact files used to create the results showcased in
this experiment. We also provide brief descriptions of each file here to allow those looking to recreate our work
or to find specific experiment details quicker access. After the anonymous peer review process is over these will
be provided on a public github linked in the main text.
ResNetVAE/modules.py This code defines a neural network model called ResNet_VAE that is capable of
encoding and decoding image data using a variational autoencoder architecture. The model uses a pre-trained
ResNet18 model for encoding, and includes several fully connected layers and convolutional layers for decoding.
The model is capable of generating a reconstructed image from an input image, as well as outputting a latent
representation of the input image that can be used for further downstream analysis.
ResNetVAE/ResNetVAE_cifar10.py The ResNetVAE_cifar10.py script contains the code to train a variant
of the Variational AutoEncoder using the ResNet architecture as an encoder to encode an image into its latent
representation. The script uses the CIFAR10 dataset to train the model and record the loss metrics throughout
the training process. The code handles saving and loading of model and optimizer states, and uses weights and
biases for logging and visualization. Finally, the trained models are stored in local disk space as well. The script
has an adjustable dropout probability and can be trained for an adjustable number of epochs.
ResNetVAE/make_plots.py This code is used to analyze the properties of a ResNet-VAE neural network
model trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. The code first loads the model and uses hooks to extract activations
at specified layers. The activations are then used to perform PCA analysis and the variance explained by each
component is plotted. The code then generates activations for a set of dot images and project them onto a low-
dimensional space obtained through a random projection matrix. The energy of the projection and the correlation
between inputs and the projection are computed and plotted. Finally, the code computes a decay coefficient for
each layer of the model and plots it against the energy of the projection and the correlation between inputs and
the projection. The results are saved to disk as figures.
ResNetVAE/helpers.py This code contains several utility functions for computer vision and machine learning
tasks. It includes a function to generate a sequence of dot images moving in a circular path, and preprocesses the
images using the default transform for CIFAR images. Another function computes the total energy of a set of
points in n-dimensional space by calculating the squared magnitude of the differences between successive points.
Additionally, there is a function that returns a dictionary of random projection matrices with specified dimensions
for different layers in a neural network. These functions can be used to generate image data, calculate energy,
and create random projection matrices for machine learning tasks.
automated-interpretability/neuron-explainer/generate_trajectory.py This code generates random tra-
jectories for a pre-trained language model. It captures activations of certain layers during a forward pass and
computes the total energy of a set of points in n-dimensional space. It then finds the minimum trajectory and
project it to a 1D plot. The process is repeated multiple times to visualize different trajectories in each iteration.
The final result is a set of PDF files and NPY files showing the 1D projections of different minimum trajectories.
The generated plots can be used to gain insights into how the language model processes various sequences of text
inputs.
automated-interpretability/neuron-explainer/generate_explanations.py This script generates explana-
tions for the neuron activation patterns of a pre-trained GPT-2 XL language model using a calibrated simulator.
1
arXiv:2401.17975v1  [cs.LG]  31 Jan 2024


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
Figure 1: MINE is deployed to estimate the continuous mutual information between the input and a given layer of
a neural network. One neural network is trained in the presence of dropout to preserve a subset of the information
in the input while the other isn’t. This demonstrates that in some settings a neural network is capable of learning
an error correcting scheme, the random model provides a demonstration of what happens to information in this
scenario that isn’t intentionally preserved
The explanations are generated for the top 10 activation patterns of each layer in the neural network based on
their mean maximum activation value compared to all activation patterns. The TokenActivationPairExplainer
is used to generate explanations for the neuron activations, followed by simulating and scoring the explanation
using an UncalibratedNeuronSimulator. The generated explanations and scores are saved for later use.
Estimate-MI-of-NN-Layers.py This script trains a very deep neural network on a simple task (preserv-
ing information) in a regime where error correction is needed to preserve any information. The results of this
program are shown in figure 1
2
Theorems and Proofs
We provide formal statements and proofs behind the results claimed in the main text.
2.1
Optimal sparse input ratio
This subsection derives the predicted optimal ratio # dimensions-per-feature to sparsity.
First, we formally define the sparse input distribution. It is based on a uniform random distribution with S
features set to 0.
2


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
Definition 1 (Sparsification). Let S-sparsification be a process that takes a vector random variable v and returns a random
variable v′ with each element of v′ independently set to 0 with probability S. If X is any distribution with i.i.d. elements
then the S-sparsification of X is the distribution of X after S-sparsification, denote it as XS
The entropy of such a distribution is
Lemma 2 (Entropy of sparse distribution). Let X be some distribution. If XS is the distribution after S-sparsification
then the entropy of XS is:
H(XS) = −nS log(S) −n(1 −S) log(1 −S) + n(1 −S)Helem(X)
Where Helem(X) is the elementwise entropy of X
Proof. Express the joint entropy as the sum of the individual entropies (chain rule of entropy)
H(XS) = H(XS
0 , XS
1 , . . . , XS
n ) =
X
i
(HS
i |XS
0 , . . . , XS
i−1, XS
i+1, . . . XS)
as elements are i.i.d. (a condition of sparsification).
H(XS) =
X
i
(HS
i ) = nH(XS
0 )
W.L.O.G. we have set all entropies equal to that of the first element of the vector.
If we assume smoothness of X the probability that any un-sparcified element of a vector is exactly 0 is van-
ishingly small P(X0 = 0) ≈0, allowing us to assume that if XS
0 is 0, it has been set this way by sparsification.
This implies that a single element of the sparcified vector has the distribution:
P(XS
0 = Y ) =
(
(1 −S)P(XS
0 = Y ),
if Y̸ = 0
S,
if Y = 0
Directly calculating the entropy of this distribution:
H(XS
0 ) = −
X
XS
0
P(XS
0 ) log
 P(XS
0 )

= −
X
XS
0̸ =0
P(XS
0 ) log
 P(XS
0 )

+ P(XS
0 = 0) log
 P(XS
0 = 0)

H(XS
0 ) ≈−
X
XS
0̸ =0
(1 −S)P(X0) log((1 −S)P(X0)) −S log(S)
H(XS
0 ) ≈−(1 −S)
X
XS
0̸ =0
P(X0) log(P(X0)) −(1 −S)
X
XS
0̸ =0
P(X0) log(1 −S) −S log(S)
H(XS
0 ) ≈−(1 −S)H(X0) −(1 −S) log(1 −S) −S log(S)
Which proves the result of the lemma.
The above statement is approximate, taking the assumption that P(X0 = 0) is arbitrarily small. This can be
turned into a strongly rigorous statement by taking smoothness or other assumptions which amount to bounding
P(X0 = 0) < ε. In this case the stated entropy result is within additive ϵ. For the case we are interested in (Elhage
et al.) X is a uniform distribution of high precision floats, making P(X0 = 0) ≈0 sufficiently accurate.
The stated ratio simply follows from this lemma by assuming the precision (and hence entropy) of the internal
state/hidden layer/linear algebra is equal to that of the unsparcified input distribution, X: Helem. The channel
capacity of m hidden units is m × Helem. The ratio, m : n, is found by divding one by the other.
3


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
2.2
Hardness of decoding a certain problem
As codes become more efficient (approach the Shannon limit given the entropy) it seems likely that they become
less interpretable. To provide weight to this conjecture we outline a learning problem such that any attempt at
decoding 1 the optimal code in the final layer in polynomial time must fail, assuming cryptographic primitives.
The existence of such a task is relatively trivial, we can see that a neural network is capable of learning to
implement a discrete exponential, an function which is easy one-way but complicated to find the inverse of. If
any algorithm were able to decode the input from a given output we would be able to use the same algorithm to
find the inverse, i.e. to solve the discrete logarithm problem. The optimality of code constraint forces the model
to keep only the bits it needs for the problem, leaving just the exponential and no “leaks" as to what the input was.
Formally the problem gives 3 values as input: a prime, p, a primitive element, g of Z∗
p = {1, . . . , p −1}, and
x ∈Z∗
p. The tasks is then to output gx(modp). This is an easy function to implement and very likely learnable up
to large p, g, and x (only existence, not learnability, is strictly needed to show the result). It is now obvious how
any algorithm that could take the output of this circuit and calculate x could solve DLP.
DLP is thought to be average-case hard for chosen groups (chosen p), restricting our problem case to these
instances completes our result. Many other cryptographic one-way functions could be used in the place of DLP
here, strengthening this result to rely on any one of a number of possible assumed hardness results. Indeed, given
a public-private key encryption scheme which is average case hard for every bit of the input, we can modify the
learning problem such that the neural network implements the public key encryption, again any decoder that
breaks even a single bit of the encrypted activations in polynomial time could be used to recover the original
message without access to the private key.
2.3
Channel capacity of a dropout layer
This subsection proves the channel capacity result claimed in the main text, namely that a neural network with
n dropout layers, with dropout rate D has a channel capacity of Cdropout ∼C(1 −D), where C is the capacity
of the dropout-less layer.
Theorem 3. The channel capacity of m independent neurons, each with capacity Cbase when subject to an uncorrelated
dropout layer with rate D is bounded by:
(1 −ε) × (1 −D) × Cbase × m ≤Cm
dropout ≤(1 −D) × Cbase × m,
where ε = −log
 1 −2−Cbase
tends to zero asymptotically for large Cbase (high precision).
Proof. We first note that Cm
dropout is equivalent to m×C1
dropout due to the chain rule of entropy and the independence
of channels.
We then establish the lower and upper bounds separately for C1
dropout, both rely on the similarity of this channel
to the standard erasure channel.
Lower bound(proof by construction) Create a uniform distribution on all but the 0 symbol, call this X. The
entropy of this distribution is equal to the full uniform distribution sans 1 state:
H(X) = log

2C1
base −1

= log

1 −2−C1
base

+ C1
base
Let Y be the distribution given by putting X through the dropout layer. The mutual information between
the two is:
I(X; Y ) = H(X) −H(X|Y ) = H(X) −
X
P(Y = y)H(X|Y = y)
If y = 0, H(X|Y = y) = H(X) as dropout applies to all inputs equally and the 0 symbol in X has no
probability mass, if y̸ = 0 then y = x and H(X|Y = y) = 0. Thus:
I(X; Y ) = H(X) −H(X|Y ) = H(X) −P(Y = 0)H(X) = (1 −D)H(X)
1i.e. to take the code of an input and resolve the original input, or what information about the input has been conserved
4


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
Implying the lower bound on the channel capacity
C1
dropout ≥(1 −D) × (log

1 −2−C1
base

+ C1
base)
Upper bound(proof by contradiction) Assume toward contradiction that C1
dropout = (1 −D)C1
base + ε for
some fixed ε > 0. Let the n-bit erasure channel be the extension of the binary erasure channel to an input of n
bits, i.e. on input x ∈X = {0, 1}n the channel produces output y ∈Y = {0, 1}n + e, where e is an error symbol,
with probability:
P(Y = y|X = x) =
(
α,
y = e
1 −α,
y = x
The proof of the channel capacity of this channel is a trivial extension of the binary case: I(X; Y ) = H(X) +
H(X|Y ) = H(X) −P P(Y = y)H(X|Y = y) = (1 −α)H(X)
Which is maximized when X is uniform, giving a capacity of (1 −α)n = (1 −α)Cbase.
However, given access to a n-bit erasure channel with α = D we can recreate a dropout channel by setting
all e symbols to 0. If The channel capacity of our dropout layer was as assumed we could use the encoding
procedure for the dropout layer, pass it through the n-bit erasure channel, perform the e = 0 operation and
achieve the dropout layer capacity. As ε > 0 this implies it is possible to transmit more information than the
channel capacity through the erasure channel, causing a contradiction.
2.4
Information loss from power law distribution
The entropy of a distribution with variance following power law distribution is highly limited, constraining
the channel capacity (C = H(X) −H(X|Y ) < H(X)). This section calculates how much information is not
transmitted by the power law distribution compared to a uniform (flat distribution).
Theorem 4. The entropy of a distribution of m neurons to precision n following a power law distribution with exponent
α, X, is upper bounded by:
H(X) ⪅mn −αm log(m/e)
if the distributions of each number follow a normal distribution.
Proof. W.L.O.G. Assume the variances, σi, are normalised such that σ1 = 1. The power law distribution then
implies σi = iα
Entropy is upper bounded by the case where all m channels are independent:
H(X) ≤
m
X
i
H(Xi)
Assuming the first element optimally uses every bit it would uniformly distribute over all values, the subsequent
variances would take up a smaller and smaller section (as the variance must decrease, the entropy implied by each
variance is approximately:
H(Xi) ≈log(2nσi)
(1)
Substituting in variance gives:
H(X) ≤
m
X
i
log(2nσi) =
m
X
i
log(2niα) = mn −α log
 m
Y
i
i
!
Applying Stirlings lemma gives the final result:
H(X) ⪅mn −αm log(m/e)
5


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Considering the Gaussian distribution has the highest entropy for a given variance the choice to assume a
normal distribution in the previous answer may appear strange. Normal was chosen so that the first variance
could be assumed to be an optimally dense code, if Gaussian is chosen edge effects (i.e. running out of numbers
for a true Gaussian) must be considered, making it unclear what the initial value of σ0 is. However, a reader that
wishes to use a Gaussian may simply modify the above proof to replace the entropy in the equation 1 with that
of a Gaussian. Any reasonable values of the variance result in an additive term of at most m
2 log(2πe), making the
normal approximation close to the Gaussian.
2.5
Connection between power law exponent and energy of a random projection
This section connects the action with the power series decay parameters, α.,
We’re given a vector of hidden activations, A ∈Rm, centered around zero, A ∼N(0, Σ), and random
projections, r ∈Rm×3 centered at 0 with normalised variance ri ∼N(0, 1
mI). Expand definition of the action:
⟨E[z]⟩= 1
2⟨||Ar||2⟩= 1
2⟨rT AT Ar⟩.
The action is a scalar, thus it is equal to its trace, applying the cyclic and linear properties of the trace we rearrange
and pull the expected value into the trace (the trace trick):
⟨E[z]⟩= 1
2⟨tr(rT r)⟩tr(⟨AT A⟩) = 1
2tr(Σ)
As the trace is equal to the sum of the eigenvalues, and the eigenspectrum of Σ is the set of variances, we
rewrite the expected action as a sum over the power law,
⟨E[z]⟩= 1
2
X
i
λi = 1
2
X
i
iα ≈1
2
∞
X
i=1
iα = 1
2
∞
X
i=1
1
i−α = 1
2ζ(−α).
As the later terms of the sum rapidly approach zero, we can approximate the sum with the infinite series. Rewriting
the expression in terms of −α then results in the connection with the ζ function,
⟨E[z]⟩≈1
2
∞
X
i=1
iα = 1
2
∞
X
i=1
1
i−α = 1
2ζ(−α).
6
