

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
Adversarial Concept Search: Predicting
Compositional Errors From Feature Geometry
Jennifer Meng Lu
Brown University
meng_lu@brown.edu
Ruochen Zhang
Brown University
ruochen_zhang@brown.edu
Isabelle Lee
University of Southern California
lee.isabelle.g@gmail.com
David Alvarez-Melis
Harvard University
dam@seas.harvard.edu
Ellie Pavlick
Brown University
ellie_pavlick@brown.edu
Naomi Saphra
Boston University
nsaphra@bu.edu
Abstract
Humans cannot always intuit what scenarios are most challenging to LLMs. Hop-
ing to capture challenging edge cases, developers either design problems to be
difficult for humans or curate extensive benchmarks. What if we could instead
anticipate which scenarios a model will fail on? In this paper, we use an LLM’s
representational geometry to predict which concept combinations it will fail on. We
attribute this compositional failure to interference between salient features. In tasks
that require systematic composition—toy programmatic settings, multihop reason-
ing, multilingual factual recall—we find that when a pair of concepts is encoded
near-orthogonally, the model reliably composes them. When their linear encodings
are close, producing interference, the model fails to compose them. Our method
reliably anticipates failure modes across different compositional tasks, without
evaluating specific inputs. These results lay the groundwork to use representational
geometry to identify high-risk examples, construct targeted stress tests, and provide
a scalable foundation for active learning in real-world deployment.
1
Introduction
As large language models (LLMs) improve across a wide range of tasks and domains, it is increasingly
difficult to identify remaining challenges. Since humans cannot reliably predict which concept
combinations will be challenging for LLMs, this gap in understanding makes dataset curation
inefficient and limits our ability to anticipate LLM failure modes. Developers either design problems
to challenge humans—but not LLMs—-or they curate broad benchmarks, hoping to cover informative
edge cases. What if we could instead anticipate which scenarios an individual model will fail on?
We call this objective Adversarial Concept Search (ACS): the task of identifying meaningful concep-
tual scenarios that are likely to induce model failure without evaluating the model on specific inputs
that instantiate those scenarios. In this paper, we efficiently identify adversarial scenarios by predict-
ing failures of compositional generalization, specifically systematicity [1, 2]. A system generalizes
compositionally when it successfully recombines known atomic concepts in novel configurations
that were not observed during training. For example, if the training distribution includes “black dog”
and “white cat”, a compositional model will reliably process “black cat”. This capacity is crucial for
robust performance in out-of-distribution (OOD) settings.
By mapping these compositional capabilities, we could systematically construct custom challenge
sets for efficient, targeted stress testing. As a practical demonstration, we successfully leverage a
model’s internal representational geometry to predict its failures in untested scenarios. Unlike existing
Preprint.
arXiv:2606.13934v1  [cs.AI]  11 Jun 2026


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
Cat
Hungarian
Can we find challenging concept combinations for LLMs without explicitly evaluating them? 
...
Subset Accuracy
Difficult
Accuracy Across All Combinations
Near-orthogonal → Easy
French
Cat
chatte
macska
Easy
Dolphin
dauphine
delfin
French
Hungarian
...
Maximum Angle Included in Subset
(2) By imposing a max angle cutoff on 
compositional scenarios, a small challenge set 
captures many difficult edge cases.
Dolphin
(1) Angle between atomic concepts 
predicts LLMs’ correctness on 
unseen compositions.
Narrower angle → Difficult
Figure 1: The angle between atomic concept representations identifies the most challenging composi-
tions, enabling failure prediction across the combinatorial space without evaluating specific inputs.
error prediction methods such as used for active learning [3], we do not require a specific input
processed by the model. When curating datasets for semi-supervised settings like language modeling,
such methods are of limited practical use. In these settings, we lack diverse existing inputs and are
constrained by the expense of generating and processing every possible input. Our approach instead
predicts errors from only a description of the concepts involved and their atomic representations.
This tool allows a developer to prioritize generating or collecting coherent, challenging inputs. For
example, it may be prohibitively expensive to professionally translate all English corpora into Russian
for a multilingual LLM, but by identifying which concepts will produce Russian errors, we can
prioritize collecting Russian data in problem areas like notable deaths in Russian. Across multiple
tasks, we will predict these compositional errors from the geometry of their atomic concepts.
These predictions rely on our hypothesis that models make mistakes when features stored in super-
position cause interference. LLMs rely on superposition [4, 5] to encode many features in limited
dimensions by sharing linear directions. It has been shown that, even without orthogonal feature
encodings, this compression can in principle be perfectly lossless—that is, invertible—as long as
feature activations are sparse [6]. In practice, however, we posit that models learn a lossy coding of
their input features: when multiple non-orthogonal feature encodings are simultaneously active, they
can interfere with one another and damage model performance.
This interference is especially salient in compositional settings, where multiple task-relevant features
must be jointly represented. We hypothesize that LLM failures can arise from geometric interference
between atomic concept representations, and that these failures can be predicted from the angles
between their encoded feature directions. Our conceptual model can use representational geometry
to proactively identify failure cases, paving the way for dynamic stress testing and scalable active
learning. Our contributions are as follows:
1. Description and analysis of compositional interference in lossy superposition. We
attribute compositional errors to interference between non-orthogonal atomic concept repre-
sentations. Because only a few features activate at a time, prior theory argues that an ideal
decoder can recover the active features even when they are encoded in superposition. We
posit that when decoding is lossy, recovery error is governed by interference between the
features being composed.
2. Proof-of-concept in a controlled setting (SCAN). We validate this hypothesis in SCAN [7],
a synthetic compositional generalization benchmark. In this controlled setting, we measure
pairwise interactions between concept representations and show that smaller angles correlate
with compositional errors. This result holds across various data conditions and model sizes,
confirming the predicted relationship between interference and failure.
3. Predicting compositional failure in real LLMs. We successfully predict successful com-
positional generalization in realistic LLM tasks from geometric interference between the
constituent concepts. In multihop question answering (QA), the angle between component
single-hop representations predicts whether the LLM will successfully compose them. In
multilingual factual recall, the angle between fact representations and language subspaces
predicts retrieval accuracy. Across both settings, we find that greater separation between
2


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
atomic representations corresponds to more reliable composition, demonstrating that repre-
sentation geometry can predict compositional failures without evaluating the composed task
itself. This establishes a scalable foundation for identifying challenging input scenarios and
guiding active learning in real-world deployment.
2
Compositionality and Lossy Superposition
We will first explain why LLMs may fail to compose non-orthogonal feature representations and
then explain how to leverage this phenomenon for error prediction. Compositionality has long
been associated with orthogonal atomic feature representations [8], but modern theories of feature
superposition permit lossless reconstruction from non-orthogonal encodings, even with exponentially
more input features than representation dimensions [6, 9]. In practice, however, we contend that
superposition is lossy and, therefore, that compositional errors are predictable from the geometry of
the active features being combined. We then describe how features can be extracted from language
models and used to empirically measure angular distance between them across different settings.
2.1
Background: Lossy Superposition
Intuitively, one can store d features in d linear dimensions. So why is lossless compression of
more than d features possible under current theories of superposition? The key assumption is k-
sparsity: only k ≪d features can be simultaneously active in any given input. This realistic sparsity
assumption permits sufficiency theorems from compressed sensing [6], guaranteeing that the encoded
representation can be inverted, recovering the original features exactly. This sparsity allows us to
recover an exponential number of features m from a linear number of dimensions d. Specifically,
if we know the linear encoder A ∈Rd×m, we can exactly recover any specific feature vector
z ∈[−1, 1]m with k-sparse support supp(z) ⊂[m] from its encoded representation Az. Given Az,
we reconstruct the feature vector ˆz with zero recovery error,
∥z −ˆz∥2 = 0.
(1)
Crucially, this guarantee does not degrade when feature representations are non-orthogonal. Even
if we prohibit nonlinear decoding by the next LLM layer, concepts encoded with very similar
representations can still be recovered using a biorthogonal decoder dictionary [9].
Although this ideal decoding exists under mild assumptions,1 it is unlikely to hold during real LLM
inference; we can assume some noise in the representation. These guarantees only exists in noiseless
settings. In compressed sensing theory, recovery is more sensitive to noise when the feature encoding
matrix contains encodings with high cosine similarity [11]. Specifically, robust decoding requires an
encoder A with low global coherence, defined as the maximum similarity between all columns,
ρ = max
i,j∈[m]
j̸=i
|cos (ai, aj)| .
Worst-case recovery error bounds do not depend on low coherence with an ideal decoder, but do
when decoding under noise. Robust decoding motivates why correlated features are known to be
encoded orthogonally, while anti-correlated features exhibit negative interference [5].
Global coherence provides bounds on worst-case errors, but we are concerned about errors on specific
feature combinations. In a specific scenario, not all interference is equal. We are most concerned
with features salient to that scenario—specifically, the sparse support supp(z) and any features that
are relevant in the context of the sparse support.2 Regardless of how the LLM identifies the salient
support S, if it restricts decoding to only salient features, then the dimension required for robust
recovery is controlled with high probability by the structured bound of Adcock et al. [12]. In effect,
this bound depends on an example’s interaction with the salient support, itself bounded by the salient
support’s local cumulative coherence,
α(S) = max
i∈S
X
j∈S
j̸=i
|cos (ai, aj)| .
(2)
1For classic compressed sensing, the relevant assumption is the Restricted Isometry Property [10].
2One simple way to limit the salient feature set is by leveraging structured sparsity and assuming features are organized into
active blocks of related features. This approach is suggested by Adcock et al. [12] and inspires our concept-salient subspace
construction by SVD in Section 4.
3


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
[Natural]
English Factual 
Questions
[ICL] str-str 
question
[Natural] Generative 
Texts in Different 
Languages
[ICL] str-num 
question
[ICL] num-
num question
(a) Large-scale structure in representation space.
(b) SCAN example.
Figure 2: After controlling large-scale representation structure, compositional generalization
can be predicted from feature interference. (a) Representations cluster by global structures that
are irrelevant to the concepts of interest. Colors indicate examples from the same topic subset (Layer
9). (b) Hypothesized illustration of compositional failure for Section 3. Two commands share the
same structure but differ in a single concept (run vs. jump). The relevant atomic concepts at the top
are near-orthogonal, enabling correct composition.
Further theoretical details on the relevant bound, as well as related bounds for robust linear compressed
sensing, are provided in Appendix A.
Why might feature recovery be less robust when the salient support has high cumulative coherence?
Intuitively, robust recovery is hampered by destructive interference from the most damaging feature:
the salient feature that has the smallest angle with other features salient to the support. This is captured
by the local cumulative coherence term, which we operationalize below as Compositional Interference
(CI). We will leverage this interference metric to rank concept combinations by likelihood of LLM
compositional failure. Our intuition is simple: when an LLM cannot robustly recover a set of features
in superposition due to interference, it is more likely to make mistakes during processing.
2.2
Measuring compositional interference
The theory above predicts that compositional failures should be more likely when the features active
or salient in a compositional input have high cumulative coherence. How can we compute this value
without access to an example of the compositional scenario?
In real LLMs, the ground-truth concepts learned by the model are not directly accessible. While
methods such as Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) [13] are proposed to disentangle the representation
space into discrete features, they introduce additional assumptions and implementation challenges.
We instead seek a simple proxy for compositional interference using models’ residual representations.
Atomic concepts and salient features.
We distinguish between atomic concepts in the input and
latent features in the model representation. Let C denote the set of atomic concepts, and let C ⊆C
denote a set of active atomic concepts which are instantiated by a specific input x ∈X(C). These
concepts correspond to a salient feature support S(C), i.e., the indices of latent features that are
active or relevant for these concepts.3 For example, the concept Spanish may correspond not to a
single direction, but to a set of feature directions that are highly active in Spanish text and encode
different aspects of the language.
Estimating salient feature encodings from examples.
In real LLMs, neither the salient support
S(C) nor the salient feature encodings AS(C) = {ai : i ∈S(C)} are directly observed. We therefore
estimate AS(C) using residual-stream representations from examples that instantiate each concept
in C. Preferably, for an atomic concept c ∈C, a vector representation would simply use a residual-
3In particular, each input x has a corresponding feature vector z(x); for any x ∈X(C), supp(z(x)) ⊆S(C).
4


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
stream representation from a single input x ∈X(c) that isolates concept c. In practice, the best proxy
depends on how the concept is instantiated in each empirical setting. Accordingly, we approximate
concept representations using a single activation vector, an average across contexts, or a set of
high-variance directions across examples of the concept; in the last case, multiple feature encodings
in AS(C) would jointly represent the atomic concept. For example, in multilingual fact recall, the
input la capital de España es instantiates both a factual concept, capital of Spain, and
a language concept, Spanish. We estimate their representations separately: the factual concept
representation is extracted from the English version of the input (the capital of Spain is)
while the Spanish concept is represented by high-variance feature directions across Spanish texts.
Accounting for multiscale structure.
Raw representations in LLMs are often dominated by large-
scale structure irrelevant to the atomic concepts of interest. In our LLM experiments (Section 4),
residuals cluster by prompt type, task family, and other contextual factors. (Dominant clusters are
highlighted in Figure 2a.) As a result, these cluster identities can dominate the inner products used
to estimate angles between atomic representations (see Appendix C). Empirically, angles computed
from raw representations are dominated by background cluster identities (Appendix Figure 7(a)).
To mitigate this effect, we apply mean-centering to the dominant clusters in raw representations
before estimating salient feature encodings. Let x ∈X(C) be an example, let γ(x) denote its
background cluster, and let µγ(x) be the empirical mean residual representation of examples in that
cluster. We define the cluster-centered residual representation as hc(x) = h(x) −µγ(x). We then use
these centered residuals to estimate the salient feature encodings AS(C) used for angle computation.
This centering places angle values from different background clusters on a more comparable scale,
reducing artificial binning effects caused by dominant clusters (Appendix Figure 7(b)) and improving
predictions (Figure 22(a,c)).
Estimating compositional interference.
We define compositional interference (CI) for a com-
position with active concept set C as a normalized4 variant of local cumulative coherence over its
salient support:
CI(C) = max
i∈S(C)
1
|S(C)|
X
j∈S(C)
| cos(ai, aj)|.
(3)
Here, ai and aj denote empirical encodings of the salient latent feature directions indexed by i and j.
CI lets us estimate interference for compositional inputs without evaluating the model on any specific
composed input, since ai and aj are estimated from examples of the constituent atomic concepts.5
According to Section 2.1, higher interference among salient features predicts higher recovery error.
2.3
Using and evaluating predictions for ACS
We hypothesize that recovery error affects model accuracy in systematic compositional scenarios:
if the model cannot reliably recover the atomic concepts in representation space, it is less likely
to execute the composition correctly. This claim allows us to use CI, computed from examples of
atomic concepts, for our proposed objective of Adversarial Concept Search. Generally, ACS aims to
answer, “If resource constraints only allow you to test inputs for only a small subset of all possible
concept combinations, which subset should you collect to maximize error coverage?” To demonstrate
the efficacy of CI in choosing these adversarial scenarios, we will use it to predict compositional
errors. For each experiment, we measure errors by full-prediction exact-match accuracy. We select a
representation layer to provide residual-stream feature representations using a 10% validation set.
In each setting, we illustrate that CI provides a useful ranking of difficulty for the purposes of selecting
a challenge set of scenarios under specified resource constraints. Assuming higher CI is associated
with more compositional failure, we construct subsets of concept combinations with high CI with
varying minimum cutoffs. As shown in Figure 1, the left side of the curve contains only the examples
predicted to be hardest. The x-axis reports decreasing CI cutoffs by percentile, and the y-axis reports
accuracy on the cumulative challenge set. If we selected the same size of test sets at random, we
would expect a flat line at the model’s overall accuracy. If CI is predictive, the curve should instead
start low and monotonically increase toward the mean as lower-interference examples are included.
4By normalizing, we ensure that differences in example difficulty are not solely due to different salient feature counts.
5Appendix B provides alternative metrics for quantifying compositional interference.
5


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
CI
(a) CI between atomic concepts.
(b) Atomic concept representations (PCA).
Figure 3: Compositional models use orthogonal features. Representations of atomic concepts
in 64-dimension SCAN models trained with 8% coverage (left) and 80% coverage (right). Higher
training coverage leads to representations that are more (a) pairwise orthogonal and (b) separated
along principal components.
We also directly evaluate error predictions by their PR-AUC. We rank all examples by CI, assuming
higher CI is associated with higher likelihood of errors. The PR-AUC baseline is the model’s overall
failure rate, 1 −accuracy, which is the score of a majority-label baseline.
3
Adversarial Concept Search for a synthetic task
We first validate our hypothesis in a controlled synthetic setting by training toy models from scratch.
This allows us to control the data distribution and model scale, isolate the role of feature interaction,
and directly test whether representation geometry predicts compositional generalization.
Dataset
The SCAN benchmark [14] is a testbed for systematic compositional generalization. SCAN
specifies a set of primitive concepts, including actions (e.g., jump, walk) and operators (e.g., left,
twice), which can be combined into instructions (see Figure 2b). This controlled setting allows us to
examine whether the angles between atomic concepts can predict compositional failures.
3.1
Experiments
To predict model errors on SCAN, for each example, we use the primitive concepts that appear in
the command as the active concept set c, and estimate AS(C) by averaging residual activations for
each primitive across contexts containing that concept, e.g., averaging activations at the jump token
across commands containing jump. We compute CI over these estimated salient feature encodings
and hypothesize that lower interference corresponds to near-orthogonal representations and reliable
composition, while higher interference increases recovery error and leads to compositional failure.
To study compositional generalization under varying difficulty, we follow Lake and Baroni [14]
in restricting the training set coverage to {4%, 8%, 16%, 36%, 64%, 80%} of distinct commands
while keeping the total number of training examples fixed at 100K. We provide training details in
Appendix D. Models trained with lower coverage underperform on novel compositions at test time.
To study how model capacity affects CI, we train autoregressive decoder-only Transformers with
model sizes d ∈{8, 12, 32, 64} for each coverage ratio. Intuitively, smaller models enforce stronger
compression and superposition, while larger models permit increasingly disentangled representations.
To establish SCAN as a testbed for our hypothesis, we first show that it allows us to indirectly
control CI. As shown in Figure 3 and Appendix Figure 8, representation structure varies with training
coverage and model capacity. Figure 3 shows that lower coverage causes representations to cluster by
functional role (e.g., actions vs. compositional operators), limiting the separation between atomic
concepts. As coverage increases, representations become more isotropic, creating a controlled setting
in which interference varies systematically by hyperparameter.
Figure 4 confirms that example-level CI predicts compositional behavior within each SCAN model.
The cumulative accuracy curves show that CI provides a useful ranking of example difficulty—stricter
CI cutoffs provide harder test sets with lower model accuracy. Across all models with non-extreme
accuracies,6 this ranking is significantly better than random ordering (p < 0.01). Furthermore, the
6Defined as 0.2 < acc < 0.99; outside of this range, compositional generalization either fails entirely or saturates.
6


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
Model 
Dimension
d=12
d=32
Mean Accuracy
d=64
4% Coverage
8% Coverage
16% Coverage
32% Coverage
Minimum CI cutoff percentile (high to low)
Figure 4: SCAN models fail on examples with high interference. Model accuracy on SCAN test
sets with varying cutoffs for minimum CI. (More models in Appendix Figures 10.) Horizontal lines
show each model’s overall accuracy as a baseline; blue curves show test set accuracies when examples
are sorted by CI. Subset accuracy responds near-monotonically to CI, significantly outperforming a
random ordering. CI ranking’s PR-AUC beats the error rate baseline for all models.
binned curves in Appendix Figures 11 show that the effect is not only aggregate, as accuracy is
strongly negatively correlated with CI. When we control for command, length in Appendix Figures 14
and 15, the trend continues to hold. The PR-AUC metric for CI ranking consistently exceeds each
model’s failure-rate baseline.
Overall, CI is a reliable signal for compositional difficulty across model sizes and training regimes.
Using only a single geometric property—and without access to a specific input example—we can
rank compositional scenarios by difficulty.
4
Adversarial Concept Search for LLMs
We now extend our toy proof-of-concept to predict compositional errors in an LLM,
Llama-3.2-3B [15]. We evaluate our approach on two different tasks: multihop QA and mul-
tilingual fact retrieval. This section will demonstrate our power to predict errors across diverse input
distributions and surface forms.
4.1
Experiments
For both LLM tasks, we focus on examples where the LLM succeeds on the atomic components.
This lets us isolate compositional errors—the model has the pieces but fails to combine them.
Multihop Reasoning.
We first study two-hop factual reasoning tasks using the dataset and 10-shot
prompt setup from Khandelwal and Pavlick [16] (full dataset details in Appendix E). In multihop
QA, each composed query is built from two constituent atomic concepts, f and g, corresponding
to the first-hop and second-hop queries. For example, a composed query g(f(x)) may combine
an atomic first-hop query f, such as author of 1984, with an atomic second-hop query g, such
as birthyear of George Orwell, into the two-hop prompt birthyear of the author of
1984. To focus specifically on compositional failures, we filter to examples for which the model
answers the corresponding single-hop queries correctly. We extract residual activations from the
last token of each atomic query and cluster-center them to obtain concept representations af and ag,
which estimate the salient feature encodings AS(C) in this setting. We then compute CI to predict
failure on the composed query g(f(x)), using only the atomic queries for f and g.
Multilingual Fact Recall.
We investigate multilingual factual recall using the KLAR dataset
[17], which tests if models can answer facts across different languages consistently. When model
capabilities differ by language, prior work has linked this inconsistency to a lack of alignment in
internal representations [18–21]. Although this setting is not usually framed as a compositional task,
prior work [17, 22–26] suggests that models implement a multi-stage process: map a non-English
query onto a language-agnostic representation, retrieve the answer, then generate it in the target
language. This process induces a compositionality gap analogous to multihop reasoning; even when
the model can perform the atomic steps, it may still fail when they are combined. We therefore
7


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
Mean Accuracy
MultihopQA
Language PR-AUC  
Minimum CI cutoff percentile (high to low)
(a)
PR-AUC
(b)
Baseline
Mean Accuracy
Multilingual Fact-Recall
Minimum CI cutoff percentile (high to low)
(c)
Figure 5: LLMs fail on examples with high interference. (a) For multihop QA, CI provides a
strong ranking of example difficulty. (b) For multilingual fact recall, PR-AUC for the CI-based error
prediction outperforms a majority baseline on every language. (c) For multilingual fact recall, CI
ranking chooses difficult challenge sets for each language. (Each line is one language; color legend
matches that in (b).) PR-AUC result details in Appendix Figure 25 and 26.
treat multilingual factual recall as requiring the composition of two atomic components: a factual
representation and a language-specific representation.
For each query in target language ℓ∈L, the active concept set c consists of a factual concept q and a
language concept ℓ. We extract the fact representation from the corresponding English factual query
q ∈Q and cluster-center it to obtain aq (see Appendix C). Drawing on prior work [27], we represent
the language concept ℓas a low-rank subspace rather than a single feature vector. For each language
ℓ, we collect residual representations from 8,000 samples in the multilingual OSCAR corpus [28]
and apply uncentered SVD to obtain an orthonormal basis Bℓ.7 In this setting, we estimate AS(C) =
{aq} ∪Bℓand compute CI to predict failure on the multilingual fact query.
This setting makes the combinatorial challenge especially pronounced: each fact can be paired
with any language, so the number of fact-language combinations is |Q| × |L|. Evaluating—and,
in a real-world setting, translating—all such combinations is expensive. We therefore ask whether
CI, computed from an English fact activation vector and a target-language subspace, can predict
cross-lingual transfer failure without access to the translated input.
4.2
Results
Ranking multihop reasoning examples. As seen in Figure 5(a), CI is highly predictive of com-
positional failure in multihop reasoning. The curve shows a clear monotonic trend: the LLM has
lower accuracy on ACS challenge sets with stricter CI cutoffs. Appendix Figure 22(b) shows the
same relationship at the bin level, confirming a strong negative correlation between CI and accuracy
(r = −0.855). Failure PR-AUC beats the model’s failure-rate baseline, indicating that CI helps
identify the specific multihop examples the model gets wrong. Crucially, this prediction is obtained
without evaluating the composed query itself: we can anticipate which multihop questions will be
difficult solely from interference between their constituent atomic queries.
Ranking multilingual fact examples. Multilingual factual recall shows the same pattern. We explic-
itly evaluate trends within each language, rather than only across languages, because multilingual
knowledge transfer is determined primarily by language-specific factors like resource level and
orthography—factors that identify similarity to English, and therefore directly control interference
with the English-language “atomic” fact. For each target language, Figure 5(c) shows that the LLM
performs worse on datasets with higher interference between the English fact representation and the
target-language subspace. Appendix Figure 27 confirms that accuracy also correlates with individual
CI bin ranges for each language. PR-AUC metrics (Figure 5(b)) confirm the predictive accuracy of
CI: for each language, CI beats the corresponding language-specific baseline.
As an illustration, Figure 6(a) visualizes example fact-language combinations, displayed with CI
scores and whether the LLM answers correctly. Qualitatively, we observe that correct model predic-
7We retain the basis capturing 0.99 of the variance; we tune this variance threshold on the development set by sweeping
0.85, 0.90, 0.95, and 0.99.
8


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
Noramlized CI
Normalized CI
Predicting Unseen Compositions
Predicting Unseen Compositions
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
(a)
(a)
Multilingual Fact-Recall  
Multilingual Fact-Recall  
11
11
CI
CI
(b)
(b)
MultihopQA
MultihopQA
CI
CI
(c)
(c)
Figure 6: LLMs fail on datasets with high interference. (a) Fact recall across languages: columns
are English facts, rows are target languages, marks indicate LLM correctness on each multilingual
fact, and color shows normalized CI within each language. CI is broadly predictive of whether the
model answers the compositional question correctly. (b,c) Subspace-level CI correlates strongly with
accuracy for most languages in multilingual fact recall; Japanese is shown here, with all languages in
Appendix Figure 30 and 31. In multihop reasoning, the correlation is weaker but follows the same
trend. Both (b) and (c) show significant correlations (p < 0.01).
tions have a lower CI, while model errors are associated with a higher CI. Overall, the multilingual
results suggest that compositional interference predicts cross-lingual transfer failures more precisely
than assumptions based on the resource level of each language. It uses only the geometry between
English fact representations and target-language subspaces, without access to the true translation.
Coarse-grained concepts
The results thus far have shown that CI predicts the difficulty of a
specific scenario. However, we can also predict the difficulty of more general scenarios—rather than
evaluating the likelihood of the model answering incorrectly when prompted for the capital of
Spain in Spanish, we can predict its overall accuracy on a dataset of national capitals in Spanish.
As when we measured the angle between a fact vector against a language subspace, we will define
coarse categories according to their subspaces.8 In multilingual factual recall, CI shows a strong
negative correlation with LLM accuracy for most languages (Figure 6(b), Appendix Figures 30
and 31). In multihop reasoning, the correlation is also negative and significant (Figure 6(c)). These
results suggest CI can predict the general difficulty of broad compositional tasks.
5
Discussion and Future Work
Compositionality and orthogonality.
Orthogonal structures are associated with adaptation to new
contexts in brain scans [29, 30] and in theory. Smolensky [8] first proposed orthogonal representations
as a path to variable binding in connectionist systems. Plate [31] later proposed a method for encoding
systematically compositional atomic properties with quasi-orthogonal vectors in a high-dimensional
space, a preview of modern overparameterized neural nets. Recent work in toy models [32] suggested
that compositional models use a linearly factored representational structure. Relatedly, Olah [33]
framed composition and superposition as competing strategies for allocating limited capacity among
near-orthogonal feature directions. However, these previous works are limited to synthetic or small toy
settings and do not attempt to explicitly predict whether a model will succeed at specific systematic
combinations based on their geometry. Furthermore, compressed sensing addresses the concern
of catastrophic interference between non-orthogonal feature encodings in realistic settings [34],
permitting efficient compression and, in theory, decoupling orthogonality from compositionality.
By assuming superposition to be lossy, we explain the importance of orthogonality in practice and
operationalize our hypothesis through testable predictions in realistic and natural settings in LLMs.
8Similarly, we extract subspaces by applying uncentered SVD to the cluster-centered residual representations and retaining
the basis vectors that explain a fixed proportion of variance. We sweep variance thresholds of 0.85, 0.90, 0.95, and 0.99
across layers on the development set, and report the best-performing configuration. When constructing category subspaces, we
discard category groups with fewer than five correct examples.
9


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
Adversarial examples.
Neural networks make significant classification errors after small pertur-
bations of their inputs [35, 36]. This phenomenon has long been attributed to compression artifacts.
Elhage et al. [5] found that a toy model became vulnerable to adversarial attack as superposition
emerged during training, and Gorton and Lewis [37] further argued that adversarial examples arise
partly from superposition-induced feature interference. In their account, adversarial attacks exploit
worst-case interference: perturbations can coordinate many superposed features so that small changes
accumulate into a large downstream error. Relatedly, Aden-Ali et al. [38] show that many individually
small similarities between near-orthogonal dataset-example representations and a target behavior
can add coherently during fine-tuning, causing the model to behave as if it had been given a hidden
system prompt. Our work studies the same underlying failure mode, but focuses on the subset of
salient features required by a particular composition. The underlying causes of adversarial examples
are therefore closely related to the ones we exploit to identify challenging compositions, though our
work explores the discrete space of input descriptions, rather than generating specific inputs.
Traditional adversarial generation requires a ground truth input and a target output. Adversarial exam-
ples are then found by locally perturbing the ground truth input to elicit the target output. In discrete
modalities like language modeling this has limitations: continuous perturbations, however small,
rarely map onto valid, coherent input sequences. By contrast, our method does not take a specific input
or target output. Instead of searching the continuous representation space for specific errors, we search
the combinatorial space of atomic concepts to identify difficult scenarios for hypothetical inputs.
Predicting model behavior
In interpretability, hypotheses are often validated by predicting how
a model will respond to targeted mechanistic interventions [39]. However, it rarely leverages these
mechanistic insights to predict how an unaltered model will naturally behave when processing
novel, complex inputs. If our goal is to understand holistic computation rather than merely local
implementation, we must validate our theories by anticipating a model’s edge-case failures purely
from its internal representations, without requiring manual perturbations.
Recent work provides evidence that such prediction is possible. Prior studies have shown that OOD
performance can be predicted from different forms of internal structure, including loss-landscape
geometry [40], hidden activation patterns [41], and mechanistic accounts of character-counting
circuits [42]. In contrast, Huang et al. [43] show that causal mechanisms are more predictive of
OOD behavior, while Chou et al. [44] find that task-relevant geometric properties of in-distribution
object manifolds forecast poor OOD generalization in image classification. More directly related to
compositional generalization, An and Du [45] predict OOD compositional generalization on SCAN,
and Blum et al. [26] show that the degree of representational alignment among training examples
predicts cross-lingual generalization in fully trained models. However, both approaches require repre-
sentations from compositional examples, whereas we only require the atomic concept representations.
Overall, these analyses are constrained to simple tasks with well-understood algorithmic structure or
to specific task domains. By contrast, our approach applies to any setting where models are expected
to systematically compose atomic concepts.
Limitations and Future work
We deliberately restrict our method to a single geometric measure-
ment calculated on simple, easily derived atomic concept representations. This minimal setup makes
the analysis transparent and suggests that representation geometry contains useful information about
compositional performance. At the same time, it leaves open richer ways to identify and analyze
concepts, such as SAE features, causal features, or hierarchical manifold structures [5, 13, 46–48].
For our demonstration, we explore compositional scenarios which all have existing inputs. But future
work could efficiently search larger combinatorial spaces and generate de novo inputs from arbitrary
combinations of concepts, enabling more systematic adversarial data synthesis for language models.
The efficiency of the search itself could be improved; our method finds the highest interference pairs
from n concept combinations with O(n) vector multiplications, but a carefully-designed search could
test combinations more selectively. Another gap is our exclusive focus on destructive interference,
where overlap between active representations impairs independent recovery. Correlated features can
also exhibit constructive interference, where overlap supports recovery [49]. Future work should
clarify when non-orthogonality predicts failure or provides useful co-activation structure.
10


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
6
Acknowledgements
This work was enabled in part by a gift from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Foundation to establish
the Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence. IL and NS are supported by
a grant from Coefficient Giving and the Berkeley Existential Research Institute (BERI). We thank
Melanie Weber, Thomas Fel, Joshua Batson, Annabelle Michael Carrell, Aaron Mueller, Yonatan
Belinkov, Jing Huang, Victoria R. Li, Ekdeep Lubana, David Klindt, Sanchit Ahuja, SueYeon Chung,
Ekaterina Shutova, Sebastian Ruder, Hadas Orgad, Sweta Karlekar, Apoorv Khandelwal, Michael
Lepori, Tianze Hua, Zhuonan Yang and other members of the LUNAR lab for helpful discussion and
feedback on this work.
References
[1] Jerry A Fodor and Zenon W Pylyshyn. Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical
analysis. Cognition, 28(1-2):3–71, 1988.
[2] Dieuwke Hupkes, Verna Dankers, Mathijs Mul, and Elia Bruni. Compositionality decomposed:
How do neural networks generalise? Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 67:757–795,
2020.
[3] Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. Technical report, University of Wisconsin-
Madison Department of Computer Sciences, 2009.
[4] Sanjeev Arora, Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. Linear algebraic
structure of word senses, with applications to polysemy. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 6:483–495, 2018.
[5] Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna
Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of
superposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022.
[6] Emmanuel J Candès, Justin Romberg, and Terence Tao. Robust uncertainty principles: Exact
signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information. IEEE Transactions on
information theory, 52(2):489–509, 2006.
[7] Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional
skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In International conference on machine
learning, pages 2873–2882. PMLR, 2018.
[8] Paul Smolensky. Tensor product variable binding and the representation of symbolic structures
in connectionist systems. Artificial intelligence, 46(1-2):159–216, 1990.
[9] Nikhil Garg, Jon Kleinberg, and Kenny Peng. How many features can a language model store
under the linear representation hypothesis?, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.
11246.
[10] Emmanuel Candes and Terence Tao. Decoding by linear programming, 2005. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/math/0502327.
[11] Zvika Ben-Haim, Yonina C. Eldar, and Michael Elad. Coherence-based performance guarantees
for estimating a sparse vector under random noise. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
58(10):5030–5043, October 2010. ISSN 1941-0476. doi: 10.1109/tsp.2010.2052460. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSP.2010.2052460.
[12] Ben Adcock, Claire Boyer, and Simone Brugiapaglia. On oracle-type local recovery guarantees
in compressed sensing. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 10(1):1–49, 2021.
[13] Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
coders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600,
2023.
11


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
[14] Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional
skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In International conference on machine
learning, pages 2873–2882. PMLR, 2018.
[15] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian,
Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama
3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
[16] Apoorv Khandelwal and Ellie Pavlick. How do language models compose functions?, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01685.
[17] Mingyang Wang, Heike Adel, Lukas Lange, Yihong Liu, Ercong Nie, Jannik Strötgen, and
Hinrich Schuetze. Lost in multilinguality: Dissecting cross-lingual factual inconsistency in
transformer language models. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and
Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5075–5094, Vienna, Austria,
July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-251-0. doi: 10.
18653/v1/2025.acl-long.253. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.253/.
[18] Xi Ai, Mahardika Krisna Ihsani, and Min-Yen Kan. Are knowledge and reference in multilingual
language models cross-lingually consistent?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.
12838.
[19] Zheng Wei Lim, Alham Fikri Aji, and Trevor Cohn. Language-specific latent process hinders
cross-lingual performance, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13141.
[20] Yuyan Bu, Xiaohao Liu, ZhaoXing Ren, Yaodong Yang, and Juntao Dai. Align once, benefit
multilingually: Enforcing multilingual consistency for llm safety alignment, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.16660.
[21] Carter Blum, Katja Filippova, Ann Yuan, Asma Ghandeharioun, Julian Zimmert, Fred Zhang,
Jessica Hoffmann, Tal Linzen, Martin Wattenberg, Lucas Dixon, and Mor Geva. Beyond the
rosetta stone: Unification forces in generalization dynamics, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2508.11017.
[22] Meng Lu, Ruochen Zhang, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Paths Not Taken: Understanding
and Mending the Multilingual Factual Recall Pipeline, May 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/2505.20546. arXiv:2505.20546 [cs].
[23] Chris Wendler, Veniamin Veselovsky, Giovanni Monea, and Robert West. Do llamas work in
English? on the latent language of multilingual transformers. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins,
and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 15366–15394, Bangkok, Thailand,
August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.820.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.820/.
[24] Yiran Zhao, Wenxuan Zhang, Guizhen Chen, Kenji Kawaguchi, and Lidong Bing. How do
large language models handle multilingualism? Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 37:15296–15319, 2024.
[25] Nadav Shani and Ali Basirat. Language dominance in multilingual large language models.
In Yonatan Belinkov, Aaron Mueller, Najoung Kim, Hosein Mohebbi, Hanjie Chen, Dana
Arad, and Gabriele Sarti, editors, Proceedings of the 8th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing
and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 137–148, Suzhou, China, November 2025.
Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-346-3. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.
blackboxnlp-1.7. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.blackboxnlp-1.7/.
[26] Carter Blum, Katja Filippova, Ann Yuan, Asma Ghandeharioun, Julian Zimmert, Fred Zhang,
Jessica Hoffmann, Tal Linzen, Martin Wattenberg, Lucas Dixon, and Mor Geva. Beyond the
Rosetta Stone: Unification Forces in Generalization Dynamics, August 2025. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2508.11017. arXiv:2508.11017 [cs].
12


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
[27] Tyler A. Chang, Zhuowen Tu, and Benjamin K. Bergen. The geometry of multilingual language
model representations, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.10964.
[28] Julien Abadji, Pedro Javier Ortiz Suárez, Laurent Romary, and Benoît Sagot. Ungoliant: An
optimized pipeline for the generation of a very large-scale multilingual web corpus. In CMLC
2021-9th Workshop on Challenges in the Management of Large Corpora, 2021.
[29] Timo Flesch, Keno Juechems, Tsvetomira Dumbalska, Andrew Saxe, and Christopher Summer-
field. Orthogonal representations for robust context-dependent task performance in brains and
neural networks. Neuron, 110(7):1258–1270, 2022.
[30] Lennart Luettgau, Nan Chen, Tore Erdmann, Sebastijan Veselic, Rani Moran, Zeb Kurth-Nelson,
and Raymond J Dolan. A neural mechanism for compositional generalization of structure in
humans. bioRxiv, pages 2024–09, 2024.
[31] Tony A Plate. Holographic reduced representations. IEEE Transactions on Neural networks, 6
(3):623–641, 1995.
[32] Arnas Uselis, Andrea Dittadi, and Seong Joon Oh. Does data scaling lead to visual compositional
generalization?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.07102.
[33] Chris Olah.
Distributed representations:
Composition & superposition.
https://
transformer-circuits.pub/2023/superposition-composition/index.html, May
2023. Transformer Circuits Thread. Published May 4, 2023.
[34] Vitória Barin Pacela, Shruti Joshi, Isabela Camacho, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and David Klindt.
Stop probing, start coding: Why linear probes and sparse autoencoders fail at compositional
generalisation. arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2603, 2026.
[35] Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Good-
fellow, and Rob Fergus.
Intriguing properties of neural networks, 2014.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199.
[36] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil
Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks, 2014. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661.
[37] Liv Gorton and Owen Lewis. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are superposition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.17456, 2025.
[38] Ishaq Aden-Ali, Noah Golowich, Allen Liu, Abhishek Shetty, Ankur Moitra, and Nika Hagh-
talab. Subliminal effects in your data: A general mechanism via log-linearity, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.04863.
[39] Naomi Saphra and Sarah Wiegreffe. Mechanistic?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2410.09087.
[40] Jeevesh Juneja, Rachit Bansal, Kyunghyun Cho, João Sedoc, and Naomi Saphra. Linear
connectivity reveals generalization strategies, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
12411.
[41] Victoria R. Li, Jenny Kaufmann, Martin Wattenberg, David Alvarez-Melis, and Naomi Saphra.
Can interpretation predict behavior on unseen data?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2507.06445.
[42] Wes Gurnee, Emmanuel Ameisen, Isaac Kauvar, Julius Tarng, Adam Pearce, Chris Olah, and
Joshua Batson. When models manipulate manifolds: The geometry of a counting task, 2026.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.04480.
[43] Jing Huang, Junyi Tao, Thomas Icard, Diyi Yang, and Christopher Potts. Internal causal
mechanisms robustly predict language model out-of-distribution behaviors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.11770, 2025.
13


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
[44] Chi-Ning Chou, Artem Kirsanov, Yao-Yuan Yang, and SueYeon Chung. Diagnosing generaliza-
tion failures from representational geometry markers, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2603.01879.
[45] Zhiyu An and Wan Du. Representational homomorphism predicts and improves compositional
generalization in transformer language model, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.
18858.
[46] Thomas Fel, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Jacob S. Prince, Matthew Kowal, Victor Boutin, Isabel
Papadimitriou, Binxu Wang, Martin Wattenberg, Demba Ba, and Talia Konkle. Archetypal sae:
Adaptive and stable dictionary learning for concept extraction in large vision models, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12892.
[47] Chi-Ning Chou, Hang Le, Yichen Wang, and SueYeon Chung. Feature learning beyond the
lazy-rich dichotomy: Insights from representational geometry, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2503.18114.
[48] Maximillian Nickel and Douwe Kiela. Poincaré embeddings for learning hierarchical represen-
tations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[49] Lucas Prieto, Edward Stevinson, Melih Barsbey, Tolga Birdal, and Pedro AM Mediano. From
data statistics to feature geometry: How correlations shape superposition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.09972, 2026.
[50] Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-context learning creates task vectors. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 9318–9333,
2023.
14


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
A
Recovery bounds related to local cumulative coherence
This section expands on our claim that robust recovery bounds can be controlled by local cumulative
coherence. Specifically, we want to recover an estimate ˆz for an m-dimensional k-sparse feature
vector z from noisy conditions. Robust recovery guarantees provide high probability bounds on the
recovery error ∥ˆz −z∥2.
A.1
Robust compressed sensing
The specific robust compressed sensing bound provided by Adcock et al. [12] limits the number
of measurements required to guarantee a high probability of exact recovery. As is common in the
superposition literature, we treat the hidden dimension d as the number of sampled measurements. In
robust compressed sensing, we assume that rather than access to the encoded Az, we instead observe
the noisy representation Az + ϵ, where the noise is bounded by some constant ∥ϵ∥< η. Therefore,
the relevant bound can be paraphrased as claiming that we can guarantee the recovery error on our
estimated ˆz from a noisy encoding satisfies,
∥z −ˆz∥2 ≤(c1 + c2
√
k)η,
(4)
for constants c1, c2.
Adcock et al. [12] guarantee this robust recovery with probability 1 −ε if the hidden dimension d is
at least,
d ≳Θ(supp(z), A) log2(m/ε),
(5)
where we define the interaction term as a positive real number,
Θ(supp(z), A) = ∥A⊤
S Asupp(z)∥∞→∞
(6)
In Equation 2, we refer to the bound in Equation 5 as effectively controlled by mutual coherence in
the salient support,
α(S) = max
i∈S
X
j∈S
|cos (ai, aj)|
(7)
≥max
i∈S
X
j∈supp(z)
|cos (ai, aj)|
(8)
= Θ(supp(z), A).
(9)
Therefore we can satisfy Equation 5 if hidden dimension d is at least,
d ≳α(S) log2(m/ε).
(10)
A.2
Robust linear compressed sensing
We now assume the linear compressed sensing setting of Garg et al. [9], which weakens the lossless
recovery guarantee from compressed sensing to near-lossless recovery by accepting the Linear
Representation Hypothesis (LRH). Under the LRH, Garg et al. [9] showed that a linear decoder of
dimension d can still recover a number of features exponential in d up to a small constant error ϵ.
In theory, the number of k-sparse features which can be linearly accessible is exponential in d
[9]—even if the encoded features are linearly correlated. However, the theory only guarantees that
this near-lossless decoding exists, not that it is applied by the neural network. We argue that if the
neural network’s next layer does linearly decode the representation, it may not reflect the theoretical
ideal probe dictionary. We will treat the LLM’s linear encoding as explicit in its activations, but treat
its linear decoding as implicit. We assume this implicit linear decoding to be a perturbation of the
ideal decoding, leading to the following argument.
Let A ∈Rd×m be the representation matrix (columns a1, . . . , am) and B ∈Rd×m be the probe
matrix (columns b1, . . . , bm). Given a feature vector z ∈[−1, 1]m with k nonzero features, the
decoded estimate is
ˆz = B⊤Az.
15


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
Due to the results of Garg et al. [9], we can assume that for all k-sparse z,
∥ˆz −z∥∞≤ε.
Now assume that the implicit linear decoding during downstream processing, B′, is a perturbation of
the ideal probe B, specifically B′ = B + ∆B where
∥∆B∥2→∞≤η.
We will show that this perturbation has its largest impact on recovery error when the sparse active
features have highly correlated encodings.
Theorem 1 (Perturbation sensitivity bounded by correlations in AS). Let B′ = B + ∆B, and
suppose each probe vector changes by at most η:
∥∆bi∥2 ≤η
for all i.
Let z be a k-sparse feature vector with support supp(z). Then
∥B′⊤Az −z∥∞≤ε + η k ∥Asupp(z)∥2.
(11)
In particular, if the product ⟨ai, aj⟩for i, j ∈S is large and positive, that feature pair increases the
perturbation sensitivity on this input.
Proof. We decompose the new error into the original decoding error plus the effect of changing the
probe:
B′⊤Az −z = (B⊤Az −z) + ∆B⊤Az.
By assumption, the first term has ∥B⊤Az −z∥∞≤ε, so we only need to bound ∥∆B⊤Az∥∞. Since
z is supported on supp(z), we can write Az = Asupp(z)zsupp(z), where zsupp(z) is the restriction of
z to indices in supp(z). The i-th coordinate of this perturbation is bounded using Cauchy–Schwarz,
the per-column bound ∥∆bi∥2 ≤η, and the k-sparsity constraint on z,
|(∆B⊤Az)i| ≤∥∆bi∥2 ∥Az∥2 ≤η ∥Az∥2 ≤η ∥A∥2 ∥z∥2 ≤η k ∥A∥2.
Since z is supported on supp(z), we can express the above using only the nonzero features. Taking
the maximum over all coordinates i,
∥B′⊤Az −z∥∞≤ε + η k ∥Asupp(z)∥2.
(12)
Under Theorem 1, deviations from an ideal decoder can damage feature recovery more on inputs
when encodings of the active salient support are correlated. If an LLM implicitly processes feature
encodings with a flawed decoder, it will make therefore more mistakes when composing non-
orthogonal encodings.
Note that the quantity of interest in our robust recovery bound differs depending on whether the
model’s intrinsic decoding is linear or nonlinear. If we assume the model decodes nonlinearly, as in
compressed sensing, then the quantity of interest is cumulative coherence in the salient support. If we
assume the model uses linear decoding, then the quantity of interest is a simple norm on the active
support—a subset of the salient support, and one that is not identifiable without analyzing specific
input instantiating the scenario. Without studying specific inputs, we remain limited to measurements
on the salient support, not the active subset.
Either way, cosine similarity within the salient support causes destructive interference.
B
Alternative Metrics to Capture Compositional Interference
In the paper, we use cumulative coherence derived from Adcock et al. [12] and measure this quantity.
We consider several alternative geometric metrics for estimating compositional interference among
the salient features of a composition. Let S(C) denote the salient feature support, and let ai be
the representation vector associated with feature i. All metrics below are computed over pairwise
similarities among active feature directions.
16


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Minimum similarity.
The minimum similarity captures the least aligned pair of salient features:
CImin(C) =
min
i,j∈S(C)
i̸=j
| cos(ai, aj)|.
(13)
Maximum similarity.
The maximum similarity captures the most aligned pair of salient features:
CImax(C) =
max
i,j∈S(C)
i̸=j
| cos(ai, aj)|.
(14)
Mean similarity.
The mean similarity averages pairwise alignment across all salient feature pairs:
CImean(C) =
1
|S(C)|(|S(C)| −1)
X
i,j∈S(c)
i̸=j
| cos(ai, aj)|.
(15)
When |S(C)| = 2, different CI aggregation metrics reduce to the same pairwise comparison and
therefore yield the same correlational result. When |S(C)| > 2, however, these metrics can diverge
because they aggregate multiple pairwise interactions differently. Therefore, whenever examples
contain more than two salient features, we additionally report results for alternative aggregation
metrics to enable comparison across definitions of interference (Figures 16, 17, 20, 21, 19, 18, 28, 29,
and Table 5).
Across these comparisons, most similarity-based metrics remain predictive in most settings. Since
the alternative metrics are partly intercorrelated, this suggests that the central signal comes from
angular similarity among concept representations. Nevertheless, empirical results in the paper show
that the cumulative coherence metric derived from the bounds in Section 2.2 is the most stable metric
to measure compositional interference across all scenarios.
17


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
C
Cluster Mean Centering
We expand on Section 2.2, “Accounting for multiscale structure,” to provide more mathematical
intuition and details.
For an input x ∈X(c), let C denote the active concept set, let S(C) denote its salient support, and
let AS(C) = {ai : i ∈S(C)} denote the corresponding salient feature encodings. To provide a
simple intuition, we consider the setting in which each salient feature is represented by a single linear
direction, and we use the linear representation hypothesis to model residual stream activations. The
empirical estimate ˜ai of a salient feature encoding may contain not only the direction of interest, but
also background components induced by prompt format, task family, language, or other contextual
structure. We write
˜ai = ziai +
X
u∈Bi
z(i)
u au,
where ziai is the salient feature contribution we aim to isolate, zi is its activation coefficient, and
Bi indexes other background directions mixed into the empirical estimate of feature i. Then the raw
inner product between two empirical estimates ˜ai and ˜aj, for i, j ∈S(c), expands as
⟨˜ai, ˜aj⟩= zizj⟨ai, aj⟩+ zi
X
ℓ∈Bj
z(j)
ℓ⟨ai, aℓ⟩
+ zj
X
u∈Bi
z(i)
u ⟨au, aj⟩
+
X
u∈Bi
X
ℓ∈Bj
z(i)
u z(j)
ℓ⟨au, aℓ⟩.
(16)
The first term is the salient feature interaction we aim to measure, while the remaining terms arise
from background structure. Thus, raw inner products between empirical feature estimates can be
dominated by shared background structure rather than by the local interaction of interest.
To mitigate this effect, we apply cluster mean-centering at the level of residual representations before
estimating salient feature encodings. Let γ(x) denote the background cluster associated with example
x, and let µγ(x) be the empirical mean residual representation of examples in that cluster. We define
the centered residual representation as
hc(x) = h(x) −µγ(x).
We then use these centered residuals to estimate the salient feature encodings AS(C) used for angle
computation. Mean-centering reduces dominant cluster-level structure and isolates residual variation
that more directly reflects interactions between salient feature directions.
In this work, we identify background clusters by visualizing empirical representations with SVD and
observing that they group by prompt type, task family, language, or other contextual factors. We
then center each representation by the empirical mean of its corresponding cluster. Automatically
discovering these background clusters is an important direction for future work.
Beyond the mathematical intuition, empirical observations in Appendix Figures 7, 22, 23, and 24
further motivate the need for cluster mean-centering.
18


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
Discrete Angular Distance Bins
Before Mean-Centering
After Mean-Centering
 g(f(x)) with f(x) and g(z) in the same cluster
 g(f(x)) with f(x) and g(z) across different clusters
Figure 7: Angle distributions of concept interactions in the multi-hop dataset before and after mean-
centering. The top panel shows that, without mean-centering, angles between interacting concepts
from different clusters are dominated by global clustering structure. After mean-centering, shown
in the bottom panel, this global effect is reduced, allowing us to better capture local interactions
between concepts.
19


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
Cov.
d = 8
d = 12
d = 32
d = 64
4%
0.169
0.703
0.794
0.792
8%
0.468
0.963
0.957
0.957
16%
0.767
0.990
0.983
0.985
32%
0.950
0.995
0.997
0.992
64%
0.947
0.995
0.999
0.998
80%
0.960
0.996
0.998
0.999
(a) Average accuracy.
Cov.
d = 8
d = 12
d = 32
d = 64
4%
−0.067∗∗∗
−0.283∗∗∗
−0.183∗∗∗
−0.219∗∗∗
8%
−0.121∗∗∗
−0.160∗∗∗
−0.166∗∗∗
−0.176∗∗∗
16%
−0.075∗∗∗
−0.112∗∗∗
−0.045∗∗∗
−0.139∗∗∗
32%
−0.140∗∗∗
−0.049∗∗∗
−0.073∗∗∗
−0.038∗∗∗
64%
−0.181∗∗∗
0.030∗
−0.015
−0.046∗∗∗
80%
−0.078∗∗∗
0.051∗∗
0.033∗
−0.042∗
(b) Point-biserial correlation with CI.
Table 1: SCAN results across training coverage and model dimension. Left: average exact-match
accuracy. Right: point-biserial correlation rpb between CI score and binary correctness. The point-
biserial correlation is the Pearson correlation between a continuous variable and a binary variable;
here, it measures whether examples with higher CI are less likely to be answered correctly. Since the
original correlations were computed with 1 −CI, we flip their signs when reporting correlations with
CI. Except in near-saturated regimes with extreme accuracies, correlations are consistently negative,
indicating that higher CI predicts lower item-level correctness. Significance: ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01,
∗∗∗p < 10−3.
D
SCAN Additional Details
We expand on the experimental details from Section 3.
Training Details
We train decoder-only Transformers on the SCAN benchmark using a size-
variation data regime. Specifically, we vary the fraction of training commands seen by the model
across coverage ratios of 4%, 8%, 16%, 32%, 64%, and 80% of the full SCAN training split. We
evaluate four model sizes with hidden dimension d ∈{8, 12, 32, 64}. Each model uses a feed-forward
dimension of 4d, 4 attention heads, and 10 Transformer layers. All models are trained with the Adam
optimizer using a learning rate of 10−3 and batch size 256. Models are trained for up to 3,000–4,000
epochs with early stopping: training halts if development-set exact-match accuracy does not improve
for 200 epochs for d = 8, or for 300 epochs for d ∈{12, 32, 64}. The development set is drawn as
10% of the held-out test split.
Input sequences are formatted as [BOS] input [SEP] output [EOS], and the training loss is
cross-entropy computed only over the output tokens. During evaluation, we use greedy autoregressive
decoding and report full-sequence exact-match accuracy. All runs use a single random seed (42).
Additional Results
Figure 8 and Figure 9 visualize how atomic concept representations vary with
training coverage and model capacity. Figure 10 and Figure 11 show that examples with higher CI
tend to have lower accuracy, supporting CI as a useful ranking signal for challenge-set construction.
Figure 12 and Figure 13 further report the corresponding PR-AUC results, showing that CI provides
a predictive signal across coverage and model-size settings. Table 1 shows that CI is negatively
correlated with correctness under point-biserial correlation in most settings. Finally, to verify that
CI is not merely tracking dataset distribution, specifically sequence length, Figure 14 and Figure 15
break the results down by command length and show that the trend largely persists within length
groups.
20


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
Figure 8: Heatmaps of pairwise angular distances between atomic concepts in the SCAN dataset,
computed from models with different hidden dimensions and training coverage levels. Columns
correspond to training coverage ratios of 4%, 8%, 16%, 36%, and 64%, while rows correspond
to model dimensions d ∈{8, 12, 32, 64}. For each setting, we show the layer selected on the
development set based on the best AUC.
21


===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
Figure 9: PCA visualization of atomic concept representations in the SCAN dataset computed from
models with different hidden dimensions and training coverage levels. Columns correspond to
training coverage ratios of 4%, 8%, 16%, 36%, and 64%, while rows correspond to model dimensions
d ∈{8, 12, 32, 64}. For each setting, we show the layer selected on the development set based on the
best AUC.
22


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
Minimum CI cutoff percentile (high to low)
Figure 10: Cumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios.
Figure 11: Noncumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios.
23


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
Figure 12: PR-AUC for different model variants on the SCAN dataset. Rows correspond to coverage
ratios cov ∈{4%, 8%, 16%}, and columns correspond to model dimensions d ∈{8, 12, 32, 64}.
PR-AUC for different model variants on the SCAN dataset, where CI is computed as the mean cosine
similarity between interacting concepts.
Figure 13: PR-AUC for different model variants on the SCAN dataset. Rows correspond to coverage
ratios cov ∈{32%, 64%, 80%}, and columns correspond to model dimensions d ∈{8, 12, 32, 64}.
PR-AUC for different model variants on the SCAN dataset, where CI is computed as the mean cosine
similarity between interacting concepts.
24


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Figure 14: SCAN predictive trends broken down by command length for CImean. Rows correspond
to coverage ratios cov ∈{4%, 8%, 16%}, and columns correspond to model dimensions d ∈
{8, 12, 32, 64}. To check whether the main trend is driven only by command length, we plot
cumulative accuracy curves separately for each length group at the selected layers. The trend is
generally consistent across length groups, but is weaker for the shortest commands, especially for
2-concept examples. Manual inspection of this group suggests that many failures reflect operator
confusion rather than interference between the action and operator representations: for example, the
model may map jump twice to three jumps, or produce four walk actions for walk thrice. Higher-
length groups contain more active components and more directly reflect the multi-compositional
interference captured by our metric.
Figure 15: SCAN predictive trends broken down by command length for CImean. Rows correspond
to coverage ratios cov ∈{32%, 64%, 80%}, and columns correspond to model dimensions d ∈
{8, 12, 32, 64}.
25


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
Minimum value cutoff percentile (high to low)
value = max cosine
Figure 16: Cumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios, where the X axis is the value when computing the interference using maximum cosine.
26


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
Noncumualtive bins sorted by max cosine
Figure 17: Noncumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios, where the X axis is the value when computing the interference using maximum cosine.
27


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
Minimum value cutoff percentile (high to low)
value = mean cosine
Figure 18: Cumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios, where the X axis is the value when computing the interference using mean cosine.
Noncumualtive bins sorted by mean cosine
Figure 19: Noncumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios, where the X axis is the value when computing the interference using mean cosine.
28


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
Minimum value cutoff percentile (high to low)
value = min cosine
Figure 20: Cumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios, where the X axis is the value when computing the interference using minimum cosine.
29


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
Noncumualtive bins sorted by min cosine
Figure 21: Noncumulative plots for models of all sizes on the SCAN dataset across training coverage
ratios, where the X axis is the value when computing the interference using minimum cosine.
30


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
E
Multihop Dataset Details
We expand on the dataset details provided in Section 4 for multihop QA task.
We study
two-hop factual reasoning tasks using the datasets and 10-shot prompting setup from Khan-
delwal and Pavlick [16].
To test whether our method generalizes beyond common compo-
sitions, we additionally construct several datasets targeting less common multihop composi-
tions that span different representation clusters.
These datasets include int-plus8-parity,
int-plus2-parity, int-plus5-parity, int-plus2-str, int-plus5-str, int-plus8-str,
and artist-birthyear-times-two. Since these are structured tasks, we construct the integer-
based datasets by sampling 1000 valid input–output combinations from the space of possible cases.
The exception is artist-birthyear-times-two, which we construct by adapting the original
artist birth-year data from Khandelwal and Pavlick [16].
We filter to examples for which the model answers both constituent single-hop queries correctly,
ensuring that errors reflect compositional failures rather than missing single-hop knowledge. In total,
our multihop evaluation contains 26 datasets.
F
Multihop Additional Results
We expand on the experimental details for the multihop QA task from Section 4.
Figure 22 shows that CI predicts multihop failures, with both cumulative and noncumulative trends
holding after mean-centering. Table 2 confirms this quantitatively using point-biserial correlation: CI
is negatively correlated with correctness after mean-centering. Figure 22 and Table 2 also show that,
without mean-centering, the trend does not hold, demonstrating the importance of the cluster-based
mean-centering procedure from Section 2.2, “Accounting for multiscale structure.” Figure 23 further
motivates cluster centering by showing that the raw aggregate trend is obscured by group-level
structure, even though strong within-group trends remain. Figure 24 shows that CI is predictive
within each cluster-pair setting, motivating cluster mean-centering for global comparison.
(a)
Bins Sorted by Compositional Interference CI (from high to low)
(b)
(c)
Figure 22: Multihop Dataset. (a) Cumulative plots when we extract the atomic representations for
concepts without mean-centering. (b) Non-cumulative plots when we extract the atomic represen-
tations for concepts with mean-centering. (c) Non-cumulative plots when we extract the atomic
representations for concepts without mean-centering.
Setting
rpb
With mean-centering
−0.210 (p < 0.01)
Without mean-centering
0.178 (p < 0.01)
Table 2: Point-biserial correlations between CI and binary correctness (before and after mean-
centering). With mean-centering, CI is negatively correlated with correctness, while without mean-
centering, the sign reverses.
31


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
Figure 23: When we average 1 −CI over all examples in each dataset and compare this dataset-level
score against mean dataset accuracy, the overall correlation is weak and not statistically significant.
This is consistent with the cumulative curve without mean-centering, where the PR-AUC signal is
also weak (Figure 22). However, the same plot reveals strong within-group correlations: within
each group, 1 −CI is predictive of model accuracy. This suggests that CI does capture interference
and failure likelihood, but the signal is obscured when aggregating across groups. This observation
motivates our mean-centering procedure. The weak aggregate trend is driven by discrete orthogonality
bands induced by group-level background structure, rather than by the absence of a CI signal. Mean-
centering compensates for these group-level offsets, allowing the within-group relationship between
CI and model failure to become visible.
num_num
str_year
num_str
year_num
str_str
Figure 24: As discussed in Section 2.2, model representations can cluster by domain-level structure
that is not directly relevant to compositional interference. When we break examples into within-
cluster-pair settings, the trends remain strong within each setting, indicating that CI is still predictive
of interference and model failure. However, the absolute CI value ranges are shifted across cluster
pairs, making raw CI values difficult to compare globally. This motivates our mean-centering
procedure: by adjusting for these cluster-level offsets, we can recover a comparable CI signal across
different representation clusters.
32


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
G
Multilingual Fact-Recall Additional Results
We expand on the experimental details for the multilingual fact-recall setting from Section 4. Table 3
provides the mapping from language abbreviations to full language names. Figure 26 shows PR-AUC
curves across languages, showing that CI provides a predictive signal for multilingual fact-recall errors.
Figure 25 reports the corresponding PR-AUC values and baselines for each language. Figure 27
shows the noncumulative trend, indicating that examples with higher CI are more error-prone across
languages.
Abbreviation
Language
nl
Dutch
ru
Russian
fr
French
es
Spanish
zh
Chinese
hu
Hungarian
uk
Ukrainian
vi
Vietnamese
ja
Japanese
ko
Korean
Table 3: Language abbreviations and their corresponding full names.
Figure 25: PR-AUC values for different languages.
33


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
Lang.
rpb
es
−0.261 (p < 0.01)
fr
−0.126 (p < 0.01)
hu
−0.186 (p < 0.01)
ja
−0.267 (p < 0.01)
ko
−0.088 (p < 0.01)
nl
−0.288 (p < 0.01)
ru
−0.125 (p < 0.01)
uk
−0.181 (p < 0.01)
vi
−0.191 (p < 0.01)
zh
−0.081 (p < 0.01)
Table 4: Point-biserial correlations for multilingual fact-recall. Each row reports rpb, the point-
biserial correlation between CI and binary correctness. All reported correlations are significant at
p < 0.01.
Figure 26: PR-AUC plots for the multilingual factual recall dataset for different languages.
34


===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
Figure 27: Noncumulative plot with x-axis sorted from high to low CI on the multilingual factual
recall dataset. The trend is monotonically increasing across languages.
Minimum similarity
Maximum similarity
Minimum CI cutoff percentile (high to low)
Figure 28: We also evaluate alternative interference metrics, as described in Appendix B. We omit
the mean-similarity metric because, in this setting, it is mathematically equivalent to CI. Since the
subspace bases are orthonormal, averaging signed basis-direction similarities equals zero, so it is the
same quantity as captured by CI.
35


===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
H
Coarse-grained concepts
We expand on the additional experimental details for the coarse-grained concept analysis from
Section 4. For multihop QA, Figure 29 shows that subspace-level CI also predicts the overall
difficulty of broader task categories; it further reports results with alternative interference metrics
from Section B, showing that the predictive trend is generally robust across metric choices. For
multilingual fact-recall, Figure 30 and Figure 31 show that subspace-level CI also predicts coarse-
grained task difficulty across languages. Table 5 reports per-language correlations for alternative
subspace-level interference metrics. Figure 32 shows that when all language-topic pairs are pooled
together, the overall CI–accuracy correlation is only weakly negative, likely because language-specific
factors shift baseline difficulty and partially obscure the stronger within-language trends.
Mean Accuracy
Mean Accuracy
r = -0.29, p =0.17
max similarity
r = -0.61, p =0.0016
r = -0.38, p =0.069
CI
r = -0.37, p =0.077
mean similarity
r = -0.45, p =0.026
min similarity
mean-mean 
vector similarity
Figure 29: We define coarse task-level subspaces and use compositional interference between sub-
spaces to predict the general difficulty of broadly described datasets. In multilingual fact-recall, CI is
negatively correlated with mean accuracy across languages. We also evaluate alternative interference
metrics, as described in Appendix B. Other metrics all show moderate negative correlation, which
strengthens the point that the central signal comes from angular similarity among concept represen-
tations, while the derived cumulative coherence bound provides the highest predictive power. We
further test a task-vector variant, where examples within the same coarse category are averaged to
form a mean vector representation, following the intuition of task vectors [50]. Similarity between
these task vectors also acts as a moderate negative predictor of accuracy.
36


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
Figure 30: We define coarse task-level subspaces and use compositional interference between
subspaces to predict the general difficulty of a broadly-described dataset. Correlation between mean
accuracy across languages in the multilingual factual recall dataset and CI; this figure includes
languages Japanese, Russian, Korean, and Dutch.
Lang.
CI
Min. Sim.
Mean Sim.
Max Sim.
nl
-0.29 (p = 0.215)
-0.54 (p = 0.013)
-0.43 (p = 0.056)
-0.40 (p = 0.078)
ru
-0.59 (p = 0.006)
-0.61 (p = 0.005)
-0.54 (p = 0.014)
-0.22 (p = 0.353)
fr
-0.34 (p = 0.139)
-0.46 (p = 0.044)
-0.35 (p = 0.134)
-0.37 (p = 0.107)
es
-0.15 (p = 0.536)
-0.42 (p = 0.066)
-0.37 (p = 0.111)
-0.44 (p = 0.053)
zh
-0.30 (p = 0.192)
-0.50 (p = 0.026)
-0.46 (p = 0.042)
-0.20 (p = 0.395)
hu
-0.18 (p = 0.458)
-0.48 (p = 0.033)
-0.38 (p = 0.101)
-0.32 (p = 0.163)
uk
-0.44 (p = 0.052)
-0.52 (p = 0.020)
-0.39 (p = 0.086)
-0.26 (p = 0.263)
vi
-0.06 (p = 0.812)
-0.33 (p = 0.154)
-0.26 (p = 0.273)
-0.42 (p = 0.065)
ja
-0.66 (p = 0.001)
-0.56 (p = 0.011)
-0.70 (p < 10−3)
-0.26 (p = 0.272)
ko
-0.47 (p = 0.036)
-0.61 (p = 0.005)
-0.69 (p < 10−3)
-0.24 (p = 0.306)
en
-0.46 (p = 0.042)
-0.67 (p = 0.001)
-0.57 (p = 0.008)
-0.45 (p = 0.046)
Table 5: Per-language Pearson correlations between task accuracy and subspace-level interference
values computed with different metrics. Each cell reports r, with the corresponding p-value in
parentheses. Correlations are computed over n = 20 task groups per language.
37


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
Figure 31: We define coarse task-level subspaces and use compositional interference between
subspaces to predict the general difficulty of a broadly-described dataset. Correlation between mean
accuracy across languages in the multilingual factual recall dataset and CI; this figure includes
languages Vietnamese, Chinese, French, Hungarian, Spanish, and Ukrainian.
38


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
Figure 32: Coarse task-level correlation between Accuracy and CI for multilingual fact recall when
all language-topic pairs are pooled together. Overall, the pooled correlation between CI and accuracy
is weakly negative, even though the within-language trends remain moderate to strong. This suggests
that cross-language comparisons are affected by language-specific factors, such as resource level,
orthographic similarity to English, and transfer from English-language representations. These factors
can shift the baseline difficulty of each language and partially obscure the within-language relationship
between CI and model accuracy.
39


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
I
Code and Compute
We will release the code upon the paper decision. For the SCAN experiments in Section 3, each toy
model was trained on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. For the real-LLM experiments in
Section 4, all runs on Llama are conducted on a single 3090 GPU as well.
40
